AI 360: insights from the
next frontier of business
From the corner office to the corner store,
mapping the progress and challenges
of AI adoption

TABLE OF

CONTENTS

2

AI adoption accelerates but is everyone on board?

03

Senior executives say performance eclipses cost
savings as the biggest payoff

05

Consumers more open to AI but have doubts that
businesses can’t afford to miss

08

Workers’ comfort and concerns

13

Embedding AI as your neural wiring: the view from
the visionaries

15

Cross-industry insights

16

About the research

19

AI adoption accelerates, but is
everyone on board?
While the media continues to debate artificial
intelligence (AI), businesses are clear. AI is here to
stay. Companies around the world are adopting it to
boost performance and insights, and are reaching the
point where it is no longer just on the fringes of an
organization but at its core – the neural wiring. The
second edition of Genpact’s research series of
C-suite and senior executives, consumers, and
workers shows remarkable progress in AI adoption
and awareness since the inaugural 2017 study.
Within large companies, a quarter of senior executives
say they plan to fundamentally reimagine their
businesses with AI by the end of 2021 (compared
to 14% in 2017), and 54% will use AI to transform
processes (up from 41%). But many people –
consumers and workers – still have doubts.
Consumers worry about bias and discrimination
from AI-based decisions, data protection, and the

job market for future generations. And even though
workers say they are willing to be retrained and more
businesses now offer reskilling opportunities, few
employees say that they have seen them, and even
fewer have taken advantage.
With media attention often focused on the negative
impact of AI on workers and consumers, organizations
must continue to change this narrative. To move
beyond the hype, advanced businesses are taking
practical steps to respond to lingering concerns,
aligning AI to the business strategy, and dedicating
time to deciding where and how to roll it out.
As businesses’ attitudes toward AI evolve, they are
more likely to see it as a means to a much larger end,
says Sanjay Srivastava, Genpact’s chief digital
officer. “After all, it isn’t just about AI. It’s about
transforming the business strategy, value proposition,
and operations. AI facilitates that,” he says.

It isn’t just about AI. It’s about
transforming the business strategy,
value proposition, and operations. AI
facilitates that.
Sanjay Srivastava, chief digital officer, Genpact

3

The future is instinctive
For companies that seek to stay relevant and thrive
in markets that face constant disruption, AI plays a
significant role. We believe the next generation of
advanced businesses will have AI embedded as their
neural wiring, allowing them to adapt instinctively
and make accurate, real-time decisions for the
benefit of their customers.
This organization of the future is an instinctive
enterprise and has three hallmarks. With a connected
ecosystem, interwoven with AI, it eliminates silos and
strengthens external partnerships. It uses AI to spot

patterns and generate predictive insights, while also
enhancing how its people work, enabling an adaptive
workforce with purpose-driven careers.
The 25% of respondents who say their companies
plan to reimagine their businesses with AI are
the visionaries who are taking bolder steps toward
becoming instinctive enterprises. For example, twothirds of these visionaries already apply AI in at least
four business functions, and 26% have it in seven or
more (figure 1). We will draw on the experiences from
these visionaries throughout the report.

Where organizations are adopting AI
In which of the following areas is your company using AI?
Visionaries

Others

% of senior executives

Finance/accounting
Information technology services

56%

28%

Operations/production

55%

23%

Strategy/general management

50%

25%

Customer service

31%

46%
43%

Research and development

20%

Compliance/risk

36%

20%

30%

Marketing

19%

Procurement

25%

17%

24%
25%

Supply chain

20%
20%

Human resources

17%
18%

Sales
Figure 1

4

72%

46%

Senior executives say performance
eclipses cost savings as the biggest payoff
With the growth of AI adoption, companies
are generating greater impact and have higher
expectations (figure 2). For example, when they were
asked about the biggest benefit from AI, improved
ability to leverage data and analytics rose to the top
(37%), compared to fifth place in a similar ranking of
AI benefits in 2017. This reflects how companies are
getting a better handle on their analytics strategies
and developing more sophisticated algorithms
that light up dark data.

The value of better data visibility also supports the
second biggest areas of impact: collaboration and
improved processes at 35% each. In 2017, senior
executives cited cost reduction as the top benefit,
followed closely by improved customer experience
and more efficient processes. But in the current study,
two purely financial indicators – reduced costs and
increased revenues – stand at the bottom of a list of
nine potential benefits.

Feeling the impact from AI
Where is AI generating benefits for your business?
Now

In three years

% of senior executives

33%
37%

33%
35%

Improved our ability
to leverage our
data and analytics

34%
35%

Improved processes
and greater
efficiency at our
company

29%
29%

30%
34%

Improved our ability
to collaborate
across departments
and functions

27%
28%

Improved our
ability to target
new markets

33%
28%

Reduced
costs

35%
34%

Improved our
ability to make
predictions or
forecasts

Improved
customer
experience
and service

30%
27%

Freed up more time
for employees
to focus on more
important tasks

Increased
revenues

Figure 2

5

A game changer: from process improvement to prediction

Robert Pompey, senior vice president,
commercial credit management at TD Bank, a
US financial institution with operations on the East
Coast, says these findings on impact coincide with his
own experience. He says AI is making a difference in
process functions, such as early-warning mechanisms
in the credit cycle.
“Process functions have become a primary focus for
us,” Pompey says. “In the past, we were touching every
[loan application] and doing a deep analysis of each
one to understand credit histories. Now we’re largely
just doing exception processing manually. Using AI,
we can be more predictive about client behaviors
that could lead to a potential default or credit risk. TD
Bank is also leveraging AI tools and machine-learning
capabilities with documents to deal with financial
statement spreading to make credit decisions faster.”
Pompey adds that while the firm recognizes these
functional improvements, the impact is also being
felt in the institution’s commercial credit workforce
and in the customer experience. “Anti-moneylaundering activities are another great example of

Using AI, we can be more predictive
about client behaviors that could lead to
a potential default or credit risk.
Robert Pompey, SVP, commercial credit management,
TD Bank

6

the transformational properties of AI. Investigative
transactional reviews that used to take days can
now be completed in hours and/or minutes using
forms of AI – a game changer. We’re also increasing
our ability to mitigate fraud – and that translates
into an improved customer experience, even if
customers aren’t aware that we’ve created a better
and safer environment for them.
“Then there’s speed to market. Customers are
expecting faster credit decisions and banks are driving
this change. And, finally, we can now enhance our
employees’ jobs by elevating their roles to higher
levels of activity beyond data entry or other skills
and requirements. Those are all developments made
possible by technology and AI.”
Executives expect the trend for enhancing functional
performance with AI to continue into 2021. They
also anticipate that better customer experience will
remain a top benefit. And they believe freeing up time
for employees to focus on more valuable tasks will
continue to increase in importance.

Pushback falls away and shifts from the corner office to
entry-level workers
Another key development is that resistance to AI
implementation has sharply diminished since the
2017 study. About 58% of senior executives now say
there is no individual or group resisting the adoption
of AI, compared with 21% previously.

pushback (41%) from these employees. As companies,
especially those most advanced with AI, extend
the technology across the organization, entry-level
workers – a group that typically knows less about AI or
how to implement it – are getting exposed to it more.

Notably, the proportion of executives who say that
they perceive the strongest resistance from the top
(C-suite, board, or upper-management) plummeted
to only 15% from 51% in 2017. Srivastava says this isn’t
surprising because executives are now more likely
to see and understand the benefits of AI, so they
are more likely to embrace it.

In addition, senior executives often have unrealistic
expectations from AI, expecting an Alexa-style
experience within weeks or months that employees
can’t deliver. For this reason, the next vital phase of
change management will occur among the entry and
mid-level ranks, where much of a company’s crucial
work gets done.

At the same time, though, respondents are reporting
greater resistance from entry-level workers, a number
that has jumped significantly to 19% from 5% in 2017.
Indeed, the AI visionaries are more likely to report

On the whole, however, consumers and workers
have become more accepting of AI, in part because
they are now more familiar with it. Yet pockets of
concern remain that AI proponents need to address.

The next vital phase of change
management will occur among the
entry and mid-level ranks.

7

Consumers more open to AI but
have doubts that businesses can’t
afford to miss
Consumers are generally more at ease with AI than they were in 2017. The proportion who say that AI has made
their lives at least a little better rose to more than half (53%), compared to about a third (34%) in the previous
study. Only 29% of people say AI makes no difference in their lives, falling from 41% in 2017.
But acceptance is still far from widespread. Only 15% of consumers say AI has made their lives much better. And
37% say either that AI does not personally benefit them or that they don’t know if it does. Broader acceptance is
held back by several specific concerns that businesses do not always fully understand.

Greater willingness to share data, but reservations remain
Consumer-facing AI applications rely on users’
data to personalize services and improve the
customer experience. But despite many wellknown businesses suffering high-profile data
breaches recently, consumers have become more
open to sharing their data. When asked if they are
comfortable with companies using AI to access
personal data to improve their customer experience,
54% say they are (figure 3), an increase from 30% in

When consumers were asked if they
are comfortable with companies using
AI to access personal data to improve
their customer experience, 54% say
they are.

8

2017. That said, 46% still have concerns, and more
than half (52%) think that the government should be
doing more to protect their data, although this has
dropped from 59%.
“There are two things companies have to provide
consumers with when they use their data,” says
Kristian Hammond of Northwestern University.
Hammond directs the school’s CS+X initiative, where

students combine a computer science curriculum with another subject that they are passionate
about. A computer sciences professor himself, he also heads Northwestern’s Master of Science in Artificial
Intelligence programs.
“One, companies have to be incredibly transparent about how they’re using the data and who gets to have access
to it,” he says. “And, two, they have to be more vigilant about protecting it. There are always going to be people
ahead of the curve who can hack into systems, but the reality is that more can be done to protect data so that if it
does slip out, it doesn’t slip out completely.”

AI and your personal data
How comfortable are you with companies using AI to access your personal data to
improve your customer experience?
Very comfortable

Fairly comfortable

Not very comfortable

Not at all comfortable

% of consumers

9%

12%

21%

7%

13%
22%

24%
35%
33%
42%
36%

47%

Millennials and younger
(18-37)

Generation X
(38-53)

Baby boomers and older
(54+)

Percentages may not add to 100% due to number rounding

Figure 3

9

Confronting AI bias is a major challenge for all
While there is greater openness among consumers
about AI accessing personal data, a large majority
(78%) expect companies to actively address bias and
discrimination from AI, fearing it can cause them harm.
For example, some systems that identify candidates
for recruitment or promotion have been shown to
be biased against women because the algorithms
are based on data from when men were prevalent in
senior roles.
“We can take the approach based on historical data
or we could diversify by using other AI techniques,”
says Srivastava. For example, when finding the right
team for a candidate, instead of using algorithms that
inadvertently favor a candidate’s face, race, religion,
or résumé, recruiters can expose them to a series of
photographs and, according to the choices they make,
use algorithms to indicate the best kind of team for
each person. “That’s a very different way to use AI for
recruitment,” says Srivastava.
Financial services firms, for example, have already
taken steps to prevent bias from entering their systems
and affecting their customers.

If we can’t explain how the technology
works, we’re not touching it.

Robert Pompey, senior vice president, commercial
credit management, TD Bank

10

“From the commercial credit management standpoint,
if we can’t explain how the technology works,
we’re not touching it,” says TD Bank’s Pompey. “It’s
critical that we understand the algorithms before we
implement them. We need a clear picture of how they
operate. Then we have to be able to communicate that
information to our employees to ensure they’re being
transparent with our customers, too.”
More than two-thirds (67%) of all consumers say
they are at least somewhat concerned about AI
discriminating against them in the way it makes
decisions. And there are only minor differences among
age groups, ranging from 68% for Gen-Z to 69% and
higher for baby boomers and older generations.
In other words, AI bias is a serious issue for nearly
everyone, which calls for urgent attention from
companies that deploy AI.
The good news is that nearly all companies say
they are addressing AI bias, but, for the most part,
their efforts have not been aggressive. Nearly all
executives say that they have taken at least one action
to combat AI bias, and about half have taken more

than one. But most firms have only begun to address
the bias issue. Just 34% of all companies say they
have established a comprehensive governance and
internal control framework to manage AI bias. Most
of the others have taken smaller steps, such as using
diverse teams to eliminate particular biases, discussing
the potential of AI bias with employees who use the
data, and modifying algorithms to eliminate particular
biases. Once again, the visionaries – the senior
executives from companies with deeper plans for AI –
have made the most progress here (figure 4).
Rob Laubacher, executive director at the MIT
Center for Collective Intelligence, shares an
example of bias that could have had disastrous effects.

“There was a research group using machine learning
to identify pneumonia patients needing special
attention,” he explains. Yet asthmatics, who are in
particular danger from pneumonia, were not identified
as needing extra attention within this group. “It turned
out that doctors addressed these cases right away,
as they knew asthmatics were at higher risk, so they
were already getting additional help. But because
the algorithm didn’t know that, it would have told
hospitals to ignore that class of patient. In this case, the
researcher told the hospital not to use the algorithm
because he did not understand the reasoning behind
it. Companies would do well to use similar caution.”

Addressing AI bias
Which of the following steps has your company taken to combat AI bias?
Visionaries

Others

% of senior executives
50%
31%

46%
33%

Discussed the potential of AI
bias with employees
who are using the data

Used diverse teams to select
the samples
and train the algorithms

46%
32%

38%
33%

Established a
comprehensive
governance and internal
control framework to
manage AI bias

Modified algorithms to eliminate
particular biases, for
example in hiring, sales, or
customer service

Figure 4

11

To bot or not to bot?
Another major disconnect: Senior executives may
be making decisions about the use of customerfacing bots without fully understanding consumer
preferences.
More than 86% of senior executives believe
customers will prefer to be served by a bot than a
call center agent by 2021, a significant increase from
38% in 2017. Moreover, 45% strongly believe this to
be the case. But the consumer perspective is much
different and has hardly changed from the previous
study: in 2017, only 12% said they would prefer
to be served by a chatbot in the next three years,
compared to 15% in this latest study.
Laubacher argues that this disconnect may be
because executives are responding to the cost-saving
properties of bots, while consumers are responding to
their perceptions or experiences with them.

12

“I wonder whether chatbots on their own are a flawed
customer-service model and that’s why only 15%
of consumers feel that they’re being well served by
them,” says Laubacher. “Chatbots were overhyped
for a while – not just for tech support but also for
marketing. But if companies can combine elements
of self-service with a good web experience, using
chatbots as intermediaries could work.”
Many businesses have been quick to implement
chatbots and AI, but not all have taken an end-toend view of the customer experience that requires
connecting often-siloed internal functions. To close
the perception gap, companies can use techniques
like service design and design thinking to identify
where a chatbot will be most effective and make the
customer interaction seamless.

Workers’ comfort and concerns
Workers are also becoming more at ease with AI. For
one thing, the expectation concerning job security
is becoming more positive, with those who say that
AI presents new career opportunities (36%) slightly
outnumbering those who say it threatens their jobs
(28%). But while they may not be worried about
their roles, 43% of workers are concerned about
jobs for their children and future generations, which
could indicate they are still unclear on the long-term
benefits of the technology.
And even though workers are not
overwhelmingly worried about losing their
current jobs, their enthusiasm for AI falls short of
senior executive expectations. The vast majority
(86%) of senior executives expect workers to be

comfortable working alongside AI by the end of 2021,
and 26% believe so strongly. But while more workers
say they expect to be at least fairly comfortable
working alongside robots than in 2017 (62% today vs.
40% in 2017), workers are less emphatic than senior
executives expect them to be. Indeed, only 17% say
they would be very comfortable.
The survey findings suggest that companies can
address this gap in expectations and continue
changing the narrative by communicating with
workers about the value AI will bring. A majority
(59%) of workers say they would be more comfortable
with AI if they understood it better, while only 11%
disagree, pointing to a practical way to get workers on
side with better communications and education.

A rise in reskilling but room to improve
Workers are very interested in receiving AI-related
training. Fully 80% say they are willing to learn
new skills to take advantage of AI in their current
job, and 31% say they are very willing. Notably, this
interest is strong across age groups. While Gen-Z and
millennial workers are most interested at 87%, 67%
of the boomer generation also say they are willing to
learn new skills. Also, workers who have invested in
training on their own time are more likely to say that
AI is having a positive impact on their lives.
This willingness to accept training should be good
news to companies, especially in an era of skills
shortages. While businesses are moving in the right
direction, there’s still room to improve: in 2017,
only 38% of senior executives said their companies
offered reskilling options like training, seminars, and
workshops, compared to 53% today. But few workers
have been exposed to those options, as only 35%
say their organizations offer AI-related training, and

fewer than one-quarter of workers say they have
received training. Even among the tech-friendly
Gen-Z and millennial groups, only 27% say they
have taken advantage of training at their companies.
Businesses risk missing a key opportunity to get
employees ready for AI.
TD Bank’s Robert Pompey says his team
equates training with engagement, which he
counts as a critical imperative. That’s why he says
the commercial credit division involves and trains
workers at every stage of an AI initiative.
“We welcome employees to participate in the design,
development, and testing of our AI deployments,” he
says. “We’re transparent, so they understand when
something is coming, know exactly what it is, and
are clear about how it’s going to fix their pain points.
Our technologies focus on helping them feel more
connected and being part of the transformation.
That’s how we get engagement.”

13

The rising demand for ‘bilingual’ workers
When it comes to the skills and experience that
businesses need to succeed with AI, Srivastava says
both technical and industry or process expertise are
crucial. If organizations have what he calls ‘bilingual’
talent – workers who are confident moving
between the fields of business and technology –
they are ready for the future workforce.
“The world will be at the intersection of those
technical and business skills,” he says. “And that’s great

14

because today’s workforce already has deep skills in
one or the other of those languages, so we are not
starting from scratch. You’re just broadening people
into the other language. When I evaluate AI maturity
at companies, I don’t look at how many data scientists
they have. I don’t look at how many process engineers
they have. I try to find how many bilinguals they have.
Because true success comes at that intersection.”

Embedding AI as your neural wiring:
the view from the visionaries
Having AI embedded throughout the organization is
a core trait of an instinctive enterprise. And the senior
executives who say their companies are planning to
fundamentally reimagine their businesses with AI are
ahead of the pack.
These companies – the visionaries – are on the road
to becoming instinctive enterprises and are starting
to exhibit the core hallmarks. They demonstrate
how they are developing a connected ecosystem,
as they strongly agree that they can easily share
data across all departments (63% vs. 41% of other
respondents) and find that AI helps them collaborate
across departments and functions (36% vs. 33%).
They also strongly agree that AI is improving their
company’s ability to make more effective business
decisions (70% vs. 46%) and that it is freeing up time
for employees to focus on more important tasks (34%
vs. 25%).
Furthermore, they are more likely to say that their
employees are willing to learn new skills to take
advantage of AI (59% vs. 46% strongly agree).
As such, these senior executives’ organizations

are much more likely to provide employees with
reskilling options, such as training, seminars, and
workshops (81% vs. 44%).
These organizations are reshaping their businesses
to thrive in the future. With AI as their neural wiring,
they will be better set to evolve into instinctive
enterprises, able to move markets, reinvent business
models, and amplify human potential.
But to get there, they must first be very clear on
which processes to apply AI to and ensure it will
impact their business’ strategy. They must also
address consumers’ doubts about privacy, bias, and
AI-enabled services such as chatbots. Enterprises that
undertake their own disruption must fully engage
their employees in the journey by offering training
and education on roles for future generations and be
transparent about how new technologies will affect
their customers. In a highly interconnected world,
consumers’ and workers’ trust must be earned and
renewed constantly, with each new platform, device,
or algorithm companies introduce.

Making decisions
AI is improving my company’s ability to
make more effective business decisions
% of senior executives

70%
46%

Visionaries

Others

Figure 5

15

Cross-industry insights
AI is becoming ubiquitous across processes and functions, but each industry has its own priorities, areas of
impact, and adoption challenges. See how your industry compares.

High tech
Reimagining their businesses

The technology sector ranks far ahead of other
industries in its AI adoption. With pressure from
companies such as Microsoft, Amazon, Alibaba, and
Google, it’s not surprising that more than 60% of
high-tech senior executives say they are extensively
implementing AI to reimagine their businesses,
compared with the all-industry average of 25%.
Technology companies are also more likely to have
adopted a greater number of AI technologies than
other sectors.
This industry has applied AI more extensively in nine
out of twelve functions listed in the survey when
compared to the cross-industry average (figure 1). The
three exceptions are supply chain, human resources,

16

and marketing. And at 61%, the industry’s use of AI
in finance and accounting is second only to banking/
financial services.
This extensive use of AI is paying off: 48% of hightech executives say they are achieving very
positive outcomes, compared with an average of
25%. They are more likely to expect AI to generate
revenue increases. And 48% also strongly agree that
employees will be comfortable working with robots
by the end of 2021 vs. a 26% average (figure 6). Yet at
the same time, technology executives point to greater
pushback against AI adoption, especially from entrylevel workers (39% vs. a 19% average).

Comfort with robots
Will workers be comfortable working with robots by the end of 2021

Industrial manufacturing

18%
21%

High tech

48%
26%

Insurance

19%
18%

Healthcare and life sciences

25%
13%

Consumer goods/retail

31%
15%

Banking/financial services

25%
38%

77%
50%

53%

45%
71%

44%
61%
44%
54%
50%
53%
40%

% senior executives who agree employees will be comfortable
working alongside robots in 2021
Strongly agree

Somewhat agree

% workers who say they will be comfortable working alongside
robots in 2021
Very comfortable

Fairly comfortable

Figure 6

Insurance
High expectations that customers will prefer bots

In the insurance sector, executives are much more
likely than their counterparts in other sectors to
strongly agree that AI is improving their ability to
make more effective strategic business decisions
(75% vs. 52%). Moreover, 54% strongly agree that they
can easily share data across all departments, second
only to the high-tech sector.
Freeing up time for employees to focus on more
important tasks is another key benefit where
insurance stands out. Nearly half (46%) of executives

cite this as one of the three top benefits of AI,
compared with an average of 28%.
Insurance also stands out for high expectations that
customers will prefer bots over agents in 2021, with
71% of executives agreeing strongly, compared with an
average of 45%. Improved customer experiences are
a strategic lever that many insurers have invested in
heavily. AI offers enhanced opportunities if they apply
it correctly.

17

Industrial manufacturing
Ahead on technology but behind on impact
Already well recognized for their use of technology
for production, industrial manufacturing companies
are also relatively intensive users of computer vision
(44% vs. an average of 35%), although less so than
the high-tech sector (48%). They are also second only
to the tech industry in their use of machine learning
(41% vs. 38% across industries) and natural language
processing (43% vs. 33%).
The sector has not, however, achieved strong
outcomes from AI adoption relative to most others.
Only 28% of senior executives strongly agree that

AI enables more effective business decisions,
compared with an average of 52%. The industry also
lags behind other sectors by a wide margin in
providing reskilling options, with only 37% saying
their company does so, compared to high tech (77%)
and the cross-industry average (53%).
When it’s well applied, manufacturing firms can reap
significant rewards from AI, including improved
product design, timely maintenance, supply chain
operations, and worker safety.

Consumer goods and retail
AI for sales and predictive insights
Not surprisingly, the consumer goods/retail sector has
applied AI to the sales function more than any other
sector (32% vs. 17% for all industries), and customer
service is second only to high tech (40% vs. 34%

overall). It is tied with the technology sector as the
biggest user of predictive analytics (45% vs. 38%
across industries), which reflects the sector’s need to
accurately predict supply and demand.

Banking and financial services
Big spend on AI but lower impact
The banking/financial services industry stands out
as the top spender on AI technology. Forty-two
percent of senior executives in banking say their
businesses invest $10 million or more annually
on AI, compared to an average of 26% in all other
industries. Even then, executives aren’t sure they’re
spending enough: only 38% strongly agree that their
organization allocates sufficient resources toward AIrelated technologies, and only consumer goods/retail
is lower.

18

But despite the big expenditure, banking/financial
services is only average in achieving very positive
outcomes from AI (26%) and ranks second-last behind
industrial manufacturing in strong agreement that AI
is improving the organization’s ability to make more
effective strategic business decisions.

About the research
Genpact worked with Wakefield Research to conduct a study between November 20 and December 3,
2018. The survey of C-suite and senior executives included 500 executives in the United States, United
Kingdom, Australia, and Japan, and was conducted via an email invitation and an online questionnaire.
Respondents were from the financial services, healthcare, life sciences, high tech, consumer packaged
goods, retail, and industrial manufacturing industries, and worked at companies with at least $1 billion in
annual revenue or at least $50 billion in annual revenue for financial institutions.
Wakefield Research also used an email invitation and online survey to poll 4,000 adults in the United
States, United Kingdom, Australia, and Japan, of which 2,103 were working at least eight hours a week.
In 2017, Genpact conducted similar research, working with research firm YouGov, to survey 5,179 people
in the United States, United Kingdom, and Australia. Of the total survey population, 2,795 were employed
at least eight hours per week. YouGov conducted the fieldwork online between August 15-30, 2017.
In a separate study conducted in June 2017, Genpact and Fortune Knowledge Group surveyed 300 global
senior executives. Respondents were from the financial services, healthcare, life sciences, high tech,
consumer packaged goods, retail, and industrial manufacturing industries, and worked at companies
with at least $1 billion in annual revenue or at least $50 billion in annual revenue for financial institutions.

19

About Genpact
We drive digital-led innovation and digitally-enabled intelligent operations for our clients. Guided by the experience that comes from running
thousands of processes for Fortune 500 companies.
We think with design. Dream in digital. Solve problems with data. Obsess over operations and sweat the small stuff. All 87,000 of us. From New York
to New Delhi (and 20 countries in between), we have the end-to-end expertise to connect every dot. Reimagine every process. And renew your ways
of working. Because we know that rethinking each step from start to finish will change your business for the better.
Wherever you want your business to go, we’ll focus on getting you there. So you can focus on your big picture, big returns or next big thing. Whatever
it is, we’ll be there with you – putting data and digital to work to create bold, lasting results.
Because transformation happens here.
Get to know us. Genpact.com.

Follow Genpact on LinkedIn, Twitter, Youtube, and Facebook.

Copyright © Genpact 2019. All Rights Reserved.

