Global Banking & Securities

AI-bank of the future: Can
banks meet the AI challenge?
Artificial intelligence technologies are increasingly integral to world we live
in, and banks need to deploy these technologies at scale to remain relevant.
Success requires a holistic transformation spanning multiple layers of the
organization.
by Suparna Biswas, Brant Carson, Violet Chung, Shwaitang Singh, and Renny Thomas

© Getty Images

September 2020

In 2016, AlphaGo, a machine, defeated 18-time
world champion Lee Sedol at the game of
Go, a complex board game requiring intuition,
imagination, and strategic thinking—abilities
long considered distinctly human. Since then,
artificial intelligence (AI) technologies have
advanced even further,¹ and their transformative
impact is increasingly evident across
industries. AI-powered machines are tailoring
recommendations of digital content to individual
tastes and preferences, designing clothing
lines for fashion retailers, and even beginning to
surpass experienced doctors in detecting signs of
cancer. For global banking, McKinsey estimates
that AI technologies could potentially deliver up to
$1 trillion of additional value each year.²
Many banks, however, have struggled to move
from experimentation around select use cases to
scaling AI technologies across the organization.
Reasons include the lack of a clear strategy for AI,
an inflexible and investment-starved technology
core, fragmented data assets, and outmoded
operating models that hamper collaboration
between business and technology teams. What
is more, several trends in digital engagement
have accelerated during the COVID-19 pandemic,
and big-tech companies are looking to enter
financial services as the next adjacency. To
compete successfully and thrive, incumbent
banks must become “AI-first” institutions,
adopting AI technologies as the foundation for
new value propositions and distinctive customer
experiences.
In this article, we propose answers to four
questions that can help leaders articulate a clear
vision and develop a road map for becoming an
AI-first bank:
1. Why must banks become AI-first?
2. What might the AI-bank of the future look like?

1

3. What obstacles prevent banks from deploying
AI capabilities at scale?
4. How can banks transform to become AI-first?

1. Why must banks become AI-first?
Over several decades, banks have continually
adapted the latest technology innovations to
redefine how customers interact with them. Banks
introduced ATMs in the 1960s and electronic,
card-based payments in the ’70s. The 2000s saw
broad adoption of 24/7 online banking, followed
by the spread of mobile-based “banking on the go”
in the 2010s.
Few would disagree that we’re now in the
AI-powered digital age, facilitated by falling costs
for data storage and processing, increasing
access and connectivity for all, and rapid
advances in AI technologies. These technologies
can lead to higher automation and, when deployed
after controlling for risks, can often improve upon
human decision making in terms of both speed
and accuracy. The potential for value creation
is one of the largest across industries, as AI can
potentially unlock $1 trillion of incremental value
for banks, annually (Exhibit 1).
Across more than 25 use cases,³ AI technologies
can help boost revenues through increased
personalization of services to customers (and
employees); lower costs through efficiencies
generated by higher automation, reduced errors
rates, and better resource utilization; and uncover
new and previously unrealized opportunities
based on an improved ability to process and
generate insights from vast troves of data.
More broadly, disruptive AI technologies can
dramatically improve banks’ ability to achieve
four key outcomes: higher profits, at-scale
personalization, distinctive omnichannel

AI can be defined as the ability of a machine to perform cognitive functions associated with human minds (e.g., perceiving, reasoning, learning, and
problem solving). It includes various capabilities, such as machine learning, facial recognition, computer vision, smart robotics, virtual agents, and
autonomous vehicles. See “Global AI Survey: AI proves its worth, but few scale impact,” November 2019, McKinsey.com.
2
“The executive’s AI playbook,” McKinsey.com.
3
For an interactive view, visit: www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-analytics/our-insights/the-executives-aiplaybook?page=industries/banking/
2

Exhibit 1

Potential
ofof
AIAI
and
analytics
forfor
global
banking
could
reach
as high
Potentialannual
annualvalue
value
and
analytics
global
banking
could
reach
as as
$1
trillion.​
high as $1 trillion.
Total potential annual value, $ billion
1,022.4 (15.4% of sales)
Traditional AI
and analytics

Advanced AI

361.5

660.9

% of value driven by advanced AI, by function
100
Finance and IT: 8.0
0.0
50

0.0

2.4

HR: 14.2

Marketing and sales: 624.8
0

8.0

Other operations: $2.4 B

363.8 261.1

8.6

Risk: 372.9
288.6

5.7

84.3

Source: "The executive's AI playbook," McKinsey.com. (See "Banking," under "Value & Assess.")

experiences, and rapid innovation cycles. Banks
that fail to make AI central to their core strategy
and operations—what we refer to as becoming
“AI-first”—will risk being overtaken by competition
and deserted by their customers. This risk is
further accentuated by four current trends:
—

4
5

Rising customer expectations as adoption
of digital banking increases. In the first few
months of the COVID-19 pandemic, use of
online and mobile banking channels across
countries has increased by an estimated 20
to 50 percent and is expected to continue at
this higher level once the pandemic subsides.
Across diverse global markets, between 15 and
45 percent of consumers expect to cut back
on branch visits following the end of the crisis.⁴

As consumers increase their use of digital
banking services, they grow to expect more,
particularly when compared to the standards
they are accustomed to from leading consumerinternet companies. Meanwhile, these digital
experience leaders continuously raise the bar
on personalization, to the point where they
sometimes anticipate customer needs before
the customer is aware of them, and offer highlytailored services at the right time, through the
right channel.
—

Leading financial institutions’ use of advanced
AI technologies is steadily increasing. Nearly
60 percent of financial-services sector
respondents in McKinsey’s Global AI Survey
report⁵ that their companies have embedded

John Euart, Nuno Ferreira, Jonathan Gordon, Ajay Gupta, Atakan Hilal, Olivia White, “A global view of financial life during COVID-19—an update,”
July 2020, McKinsey.com.
Arif Cam, Michael Chui, Bryce Hall, “Global AI Survey: AI proves its worth, but few scale impact,” November 2019, McKinsey.com.

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

3

at least one AI capability. The most commonly
used AI technologies are: robotic process
automation (36 percent) for structured
operational tasks; virtual assistants or
conversational interfaces (32 percent ) for
customer service divisions; and machine
learning techniques (25 percent) to detect
fraud and support underwriting and risk
management. While for many financial services
firms, the use of AI is episodic and focused on
specific use cases, an increasing number of
banking leaders are taking a comprehensive
approach to deploying advanced AI, and
embedding it across the full lifecycle, from the
front- to the back-office (Exhibit 2).
—

Digital ecosystems are disintermediating
traditional financial services. By enabling
access to a diverse set of services through
a common access point, digital ecosystems
have transformed the way consumers discover,
evaluate, and purchase goods and services.
For example, WeChat users in China can use
the same app not only to exchange messages,

but also to book a cab, order food, schedule
a massage, play games, send money to a
contact, and access a personal line of credit.
Similarly, across countries, nonbanking
businesses and “super apps” are embedding
financial services and products in their
journeys, delivering compelling experiences
for customers, and disrupting traditional
methods for discovering banking products and
services. As a result, banks will need to rethink
how they participate in digital ecosystems,
and use AI to harness the full power of data
available from these new sources.
— Technology giants are entering financial
services as the next adjacency to their
core business models. Globally, leading
technology giants have built extraordinary
market advantages: a large and engaged
customer network; troves of data, enabling a
robust and increasingly precise understanding
of individual customers; natural strengths
in developing and scaling innovative
technologies (including AI); and access to

Web <year>
<article slug>
Exhibit
<x>
Exhibit
2 of <y>

Banks are
AIAI
technologies
to improve
customer
Banks
areexpanding
expandingtheir
theiruse
useofof
technologies
to improve
customer
experiences and
processes.​
experiences
andback-office
back-office
processes.
Front office
Smile-to-pay facial scanning
to initiate transaction

Conversational bots for
basic servicing requests

4

Back office
Micro-expression analysis
with virtual loan officers

Biometrics (voice, video,
print) to authenticate and
authorize

Humanoid robots in branches Machine vision and naturalto serve customers
language processing to scan
and process documents

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

Machine learning to detect
fraud patterns,
cybersecurity attacks

Real-time transaction
analysis for risk monitoring

low-cost capital. In the past, tech giants have
aggressively entered into adjacent businesses
in search of new revenue streams and to
keep customers engaged with a fresh stream
of offerings. Big-tech players have already
gained a foothold in financial services in select
domains (especially in payments and, in some
cases, lending and insurance), and they may
soon look to press their advantages to deepen
their presence and build greater scale.

2. What might the AI-bank of the
future look like?
To meet customers’ rising expectations and
beat competitive threats in the AI-powered

digital era, the AI-first bank will offer propositions
and experiences that are intelligent (that
is, recommending actions, anticipating and
automating key decisions or tasks), personalized
(that is, relevant and timely, and based on a
detailed understanding of customers’ past
behavior and context), and truly omnichannel
(seamlessly spanning the physical and online
contexts across multiple devices, and delivering
a consistent experience) and that blend banking
capabilities with relevant products and services
beyond banking. Exhibit 3 illustrates how such a
bank could engage a retail customer throughout
the day. Exhibit 4 shows an example of the banking
experience of a small-business owner or the
treasurer of a medium-size enterprise.

Exhibit 3

How
banking
a retail
customer.
How AI
AI transforms
transforms banking
forfor
a retail
customer.​
Name: Anya
Age: 28 years
Occupation: Working professional

Seamless
integration with
nonbanking apps

Anya uses smileto-pay to
initiate payment

Analyticsbacked
personalized offers

App offers moneymanagement and
savings solutions,
prioritizes card
payments

Anya receives
integrated portfolio
view and a set of
actions with the
potential to
Aggregated
augment
returns
overview of daily
activities

Savings and
Bank app
Personalized
Anya receives
Facial recognition Anya gets 2% off
investment
recomrecognizes Anya's
money-management
on health
for frictionless
end-of-day
mendations
solutions
spending patterns
payment
insurance
overview of her
and suggests
premiums based
activities, with
coffee at nearby
on her gym
augmented reality,
cafes
activity and
and reminders to
sleep habits
pay bills
Intelligent

Personalized

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

Omnichannel

Banking and beyond banking

5

Exhibit 4

How AI transforms banking for a small- or medium-size-enterprise customer. ​

How AI transforms banking for a small- or medium-size-enterprise customer.
Name: Dany
Age: 36 years
Occupation: Treasurer of a small manufacturing unit
Dany answers
short questionnaire;
app scans his facial
movements
Customized
lending solutions

Firm is credited
with funds after
application
approval

Dany is assisted
in sourcing and
selecting the
Seamless
right vendors
inventory and receivand partners
ables management

Bank is integrated Micro-expression
App suggests
with client
analysis to review loan items to reorder,
business
applications
gives visual reports
management
on receivables
systems
management
Dany receives
Dany gets loan
customized
offer based on
solutions for
company projected
invoice discounting,
cash flows
factoring, etc.
Intelligent

Personalized

Internally, the AI-first institution will be optimized
for operational efficiency through extreme
automation of manual tasks (a “zero-ops” mindset)
and the replacement or augmentation of human
decisions by advanced diagnostic engines in
diverse areas of bank operations. These gains
in operational performance will flow from broad
application of traditional and leading-edge AI
technologies, such as machine learning and
facial recognition, to analyze large and complex
reserves of customer data in (near) real time.

6

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

SME platform to
source suppliers
and buyers

Omnichannel

An AI-powered
virtual adviser
resolves queries
Dany seeks
Beyondprofessional advice
banking support on a lending offer
services

Dany gets prefilled Serviced by an AItax documents to powered virtual
review and
adviser
approve; files with
a single click

Banking and beyond banking

The AI-first bank of the future will also enjoy
the speed and agility that today characterize
digital-native companies. It will innovate
rapidly, launching new features in days or
weeks instead of months. It will collaborate
extensively with partners to deliver new
value propositions integrated seamlessly
across journeys, technology platforms, and
data sets.

3. What obstacles prevent banks from
deploying AI capabilities at scale?
Incumbent banks face two sets of objectives,
which on first glance appear to be at odds. On
the one hand, banks need to achieve the speed,
agility, and flexibility innate to a fintech. On the
other, they must continue managing the scale,
security standards, and regulatory requirements
of a traditional financial-services enterprise.
Despite billions of dollars spent on changethe-bank technology initiatives each year, few
banks have succeeded in diffusing and scaling
AI technologies throughout the organization.
Among the obstacles hampering banks’ efforts,
the most common is the lack of a clear strategy
for AI.⁶ Two additional challenges for many
banks are, first, a weak core technology and data
backbone and, second, an outmoded operating
model and talent strategy.
Built for stability, banks’ core technology
systems have performed well, particularly in
supporting traditional payments and lending
operations. However, banks must resolve
several weaknesses inherent to legacy systems
before they can deploy AI technologies at scale
(Exhibit 5). First and foremost, these systems
often lack the capacity and flexibility required
to support the variable computing requirements,
data-processing needs, and real-time analysis
that closed-loop AI applications require.⁷ Core
systems are also difficult to change, and their
maintenance requires significant resources.
What is more, many banks’ data reserves are
fragmented across multiple silos (separate
business and technology teams), and analytics
efforts are focused narrowly on stand-alone use

6
7

cases. Without a centralized data backbone, it is
practically impossible to analyze the relevant data
and generate an intelligent recommendation or
offer at the right moment. If data constitute the
bank’s fundamental raw material, the data must be
governed and made available securely in a manner
that enables analysis of data from internal and
external sources at scale for millions of customers,
in (near) real time, at the “point of decision” across
the organization. Lastly, for various analytics and
advanced-AI models to scale, organizations need
a robust set of tools and standardized processes
to build, test, deploy, and monitor models, in a
repeatable and “industrial” way.
Banks’ traditional operating models further
impede their efforts to meet the need for
continuous innovation. Most traditional banks
are organized around distinct business lines,
with centralized technology and analytics
teams structured as cost centers. Business
owners define goals unilaterally, and alignment
with the enterprise’s technology and analytics
strategy (where it exists) is often weak or
inadequate. Siloed working teams and “waterfall”
implementation processes invariably lead
to delays, cost overruns, and suboptimal
performance. Additionally, organizations lack
a test-and-learn mindset and robust feedback
loops that promote rapid experimentation and
iterative improvement. Often unsatisfied with the
performance of past projects and experiments,
business executives tend to rely on third-party
technology providers for critical functionalities,
starving capabilities and talent that should ideally
be developed in-house to ensure competitive
differentiation.

Michael Chui, Sankalp Malhotra, “AI adoption advances, but foundational barriers remain,” November 2018, McKinsey.com.
“Closed loop” refers to the fact that the models’ intelligence is applied to incoming data in near real time, which in turn refines the content presented
to the user in near real time.

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

7

Exhibit 5

Investmentsinincore
core
tech
critical
to meet
increasing
demands
for
Investments
tech
areare
critical
to meet
increasing
demands
for
scalability,flexibility,
flexibility,and
and
speed.
scalability,
speed.​

Cloud

Data

Challenges

How cloud computing can help

Core/legacy systems can’t scale sufficiently
(eg, 150+ transactions/second)

Enables higher scalability, resilience of services and
platforms through virtualization of infrastructure

Significant time, effort, and team sizes
required to maintain infrastructure

Reduces IT overhead, enables automation of several
infrastructure-management tasks, and allows development
teams to “self-serve”

Long time required to provision environments
for development and testing (eg, 40+ days in
some cases)

8

Enables faster time to market; dramatically reduces time by
providing managed services (e., setting up new environments
in minutes vs days)

Challenges

How best-in-class data management can help

High error rates; poor refresh rates; lack of
golden source of truth

Ensures high degree of accuracy and single source of truth
in a cost-effective manner

Hard to access in a timely fashion for various
use cases

Enables timely and role-appropriate access for various use
cases (eg, regulatory, business intelligence at scale, advanced
analytics and machine learning, exploratory)

Data trapped in silos across multiple units and
hard to integrate with external sources

1

API1

Enables a 360-degree view across the organization to enable
generation of deeper insights by decision-making algorithms
and models

Challenges

How APIs can help

Longer time to market, limited reusability of
code and software across internal teams

Promote reusability and accelerate development by enabling
access to granular services (internal and external)

Hard to partner or collaborate with external
partners; long time to integrate

Reduce complexity and enable faster collaboration with
external partners

Suboptimal user experience—hard to stitch
data and services across multiple functional
siloes for an integrated proposition

Enhance customer experience by enabling timely access to
data and services across different teams; faster time to market
due to limited coordination, cross-team testing

Application programming interface.

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

4. How can banks transform to
become AI-first?
To overcome the challenges that limit
organization-wide deployment of AI
technologies, banks must take a holistic
approach. To become AI-first, banks must invest
in transforming capabilities across all four layers
of the integrated capability stack (Exhibit 6): the
engagement layer, the AI-powered decisioning
layer, the core technology and data layer, and the
operating model.
As we will explain, when these interdependent
layers work in unison, they enable a bank to
provide customers with distinctive omnichannel
experiences, support at-scale personalization,
and drive the rapid innovation cycles critical
to remaining competitive in today’s world.
Each layer has a unique role to play—underinvestment in a single layer creates a weak link
that can cripple the entire enterprise.
The following paragraphs explore some of the
changes banks will need to undertake in each
layer of this capability stack.
Layer 1: Reimagining the customer
engagement layer
Increasingly, customers expect their bank to be
present in their end-use journeys, know their
context and needs no matter where they interact
with the bank, and to enable a frictionless
experience. Numerous banking activities
(e.g., payments, certain types of lending) are
becoming invisible, as journeys often begin and
end on interfaces beyond the bank’s proprietary
platforms. For the bank to be ubiquitous in
customers’ lives, solving latent and emerging
needs while delivering intuitive omnichannel
experiences, banks will need to reimagine how
they engage with customers and undertake
several key shifts.

First, banks will need to move beyond highly
standardized products to create integrated
propositions that target “jobs to be done.”⁸ This
requires embedding personalization decisions
(what to offer, when to offer, which channel
to offer) in the core customer journeys and
designing value propositions that go beyond the
core banking product and include intelligence
that automates decisions and activities on
behalf of the customer. Further, banks should
strive to integrate relevant non-banking
products and services that, together with the
core banking product, comprehensively address
the customer end need. An illustration of the
“jobs-to-be-done” approach can be seen in the
way fintech Tally helps customers grapple with
the challenge of managing multiple credit cards.
The fintech’s customers can solve several pain
points—including decisions about which card to
pay first (tailored to the forecast of their monthly
income and expenses), when to pay, and how
much to pay (minimum balance versus retiring
principal)—a complex set of tasks that are often
not done well by customers themselves.
The second necessary shift is to embed
customer journeys seamlessly in partner
ecosystems and platforms, so that banks
engage customers at the point of end use and
in the process take advantage of partners’
data and channel platform to increase higher
engagement and usage. ICICI Bank in India
embedded basic banking services on WhatsApp
(a popular messaging platform in India) and
scaled up to one million users within three
months of launch.⁹ In a world where consumers
and businesses rely increasingly on digital
ecosystems, banks should decide on the
posture they would like to adopt across multiple
ecosystems—that is, to build, orchestrate, or
partner—and adapt the capabilities of their
engagement layer accordingly.

8

Clayton M. Christensen, Taddy Hall, Karen Dillon and David S. Duncan, “Know your customers ‘jobs to be done,” Harvard Business Review,
September 2016, hbr.org.
9
“ICICI Bank crosses 1 million users on WhatsApp platform,” Live Mint, July 7, 2020, livemint.com.

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

9

Exhibit 6

To
AI-first
institution,
a bank
must
streamline
its capability
stack stack
for
Tobecome
becomeanan
AI-first
institution,
a bank
must
streamline
its capability
value
creation.​
for value creation.
AI bank of the future
Profitability

Reimagined
engagement

Intelligent products,
tools, experiences
for customers and
employees

Personalization
at scale

Omnichannel
experience

Speed and
innovation

Within-bank channels and Beyond-bank channels
journeys (eg, web, apps,
and journeys (eg,
mobile, smart devices,
ecosystems, partners,
branches, Internet of Things)
distributors)
2

1

AI-powered
decision
making

Credit
decision
making

Customer
acquisition

7
AI capabilities

Naturallanguage
processing

Voicescript
analysis

Monitoring
and
collections

Virtual
agents, Computer
vision
bots

4

3

5
Digital marketing

6
Advanced
analytics

Smart service and
operations

Retention
and crossselling,
upselling

Facial
recognition

Blockchain

Servicing
and
engagement

Robotics

Behavioral
analytics

A. Tech-forward strategy (in-house build of differential capabilities
vs buying offerings; in-house talent plan)

Core
technology
and data

8
Core technology
and data

B. Data
management for
AI world

Platform operating
model

D. Intelligent
infrastructure
(AI operations
command,
hybrid cloud
setup, etc)

B. Agile way
of working

C. Remote
collaboration

10 Value capture

10

E. Hollowing the
core (core
modernization)

F. Cybersecurity
and
control
tiers

A. Autonomous business + tech teams

9

Operating
model

C. Modern
API architecture

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

D. Modern talent
strategy (hiring,
reskilling)

E. Culture and
capabilities

Third, banks will need to redesign overall
customer experiences and specific journeys for
omnichannel interaction. This involves allowing
customers to move across multiple modes (e.g.,
web, mobile app, branch, call center, smart
devices) seamlessly within a single journey
and retaining and continuously updating the
latest context of interaction. Leading consumer
internet companies with offline-to-online
business models have reshaped customer
expectations on this dimension. Some banks
are pushing ahead in the design of omnichannel
journeys, but most will need to catch up.
Reimagining the engagement layer of the
AI bank will require a clear strategy on how
to engage customers through channels
owned by non-bank partners. Banks will
need to adopt a design-thinking lens as they
build experiences within and beyond the
bank’s platform, engineering engagement
interfaces for flexibility to enable tailoring and
personalization for customers, reengineering
back-end processes, and ensuring that datacapture funnels (e.g., clickstream) are granularly
embedded in the bank’s engagement layer. All
of this aims to provide a granular understanding
of journeys and enable continuous
improvement.10
Layer 2: Building the AI-powered decisionmaking layer
Delivering personalized messages and
decisions to millions of users and thousands
of employees, in (near) real time across the full
spectrum of engagement channels, will require
the bank to develop an at-scale AI-powered
decision-making layer. Across domains within
the bank, AI techniques can either fully replace
or augment human judgment to produce
significantly better outcomes (e.g., higher
accuracy and speed), enhanced experience
for customers (e.g., more personalized
interaction and offerings), actionable insights
for employees (e.g., which customer to contact
first with next-best-action recommendations),

and stronger risk management (e.g., earlier
detection of likelihood of default and
fraudulent activities).
To establish a robust AI-powered decision
layer, banks will need to shift from attempting
to develop specific use cases and point
solutions to an enterprise-wide road map for
deploying advanced-analytics (AA)/machinelearning (ML) models across entire business
domains. As an illustration, in the domain of
unsecured consumer lending alone, more
than 20 decisions across the life cycle can be
automated.11 To enable at-scale development
of decision models, banks need to make the
development process repeatable and thus
capable of delivering solutions effectively and
on-time. In addition to strong collaboration
between business teams and analytics
talent, this requires robust tools for model
development, efficient processes (e.g., for
re-using code across projects), and diffusion
of knowledge (e.g., repositories) across teams.
Beyond the at-scale development of decision
models across domains, the road map should
also include plans to embed AI in businessas-usual process. Often underestimated,
this effort requires rewiring the business
processes in which these AA/AI models will be
embedded; making AI decisioning “explainable”
to end-users; and a change-management plan
that addresses employee mindset shifts and
skills gaps. To foster continuous improvement
beyond the first deployment, banks also
need to establish infrastructure (e.g., data
measurement) and processes (e.g., periodic
reviews of performance, risk management of AI
models) for feedback loops to flourish.
Additionally, banks will need to augment
homegrown AI models, with fast-evolving
capabilities (e.g., natural-language processing,
computer-vision techniques, AI agents
and bots, augmented or virtual reality) in
their core business processes. Many of
these leading-edge capabilities have the

10

Jennifer Kilian, Hugo Sarrazin, and Hyo Yeon, “Building a design-driven culture,” September 2015, McKinsey.com.
Renny Thomas, Vinayak HV, Raphael Bick, and Shwaitang Singh, “Ten lessons for building a winning retail and small-business digital lending
franchise,” November 2019, McKinsey.com.

11

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

11

potential to bring a paradigm shift in customer
experience and/or operational efficiency. While
many banks may lack both the talent and the
requisite investment appetite to develop these
technologies themselves, they need at minimum
to be able to procure and integrate these
emerging capabilities from specialist providers
at rapid speed through an architecture enabled
by an application programming interface (API),
promote continuous experimentation with these
technologies in sandbox environments to test and
refine applications and evaluate potential risks,
and subsequently decide which technologies to
deploy at scale.
To deliver these decisions and capabilities and to
engage customers across the full life cycle, from
acquisition to upsell and cross-sell to retention
and win-back, banks will need to establish
enterprise-wide digital marketing machinery. This
machinery is critical for translating decisions and
insights generated in the decision-making layer
into a set of coordinated interventions delivered
through the bank’s engagement layer. This
machinery has several critical elements, which
include:
—

Data-ingestion pipelines that capture a range
of data from multiple sources both within the
bank (e.g., clickstream data from apps) and
beyond (e.g., third-party partnerships with
telco providers)

—

Data platforms that aggregate, develop, and
maintain a 360-degree view of customers and
enable AA/ML models to run and execute in
near real time

—

Campaign platforms that track past actions
and coordinate forward-looking interventions
across the range of channels in the
engagement layer

Layer 3: Strengthening the core technology and
data infrastructure
Deploying AI capabilities across the organization
requires a scalable, resilient, and adaptable set
of core-technology components. A weak core-

12

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

technology backbone, starved of the investments
needed for modernization, can dramatically
reduce the effectiveness of the decision-making
and engagement layers.
The core-technology-and-data layer has six key
elements (Exhibit 7):
— Tech-forward strategy. Banks should have
a unified technology strategy that is tightly
aligned to business strategy and outlines
strategic choices on which elements, skill
sets, and talent the bank will keep in-house
and those it will source through partnerships
or vendor relationships. In addition, the
tech strategy needs to articulate how each
component of the target architecture will both
support the bank’s vision to be an AI-first
institution and interact with each layer of the
capability stack.
—

Data management for the AI-enabled world.
The bank’s data management must ensure
data liquidity—that is, the ability to access,
ingest, and manipulate the data that serve as
the foundation for all insights and decisions
generated in the decision-making layer.
Data liquidity increases with the removal of
functional silos and allows multiple divisions
to operate off the same data, with increased
coordination. The data value chain begins with
seamless sourcing of data from all relevant
internal systems and external platforms. This
includes ingesting data into a lake, cleaning
and labeling the data required for diverse use
cases (e.g., regulatory reporting, business
intelligence at scale, AA/ML diagnostics),
segregating incoming data (from both existing
and prospective customers) to be made
available for immediate analysis from data to
be cleaned and labeled for future analysis.
Furthermore, as banks design and build their
centralized data-management infrastructure,
they should develop additional controls and
monitoring tools to ensure data security,
privacy, and regulatory compliance—for
example, timely and role-appropriate access
across the organization for various use cases.

Exhibit 7

The
accommodates
use of the
The core-technology-and-data
core-technology-and-data layer layer
accommodates
increasingincreasing
use of the cloud
cloud
and reduction
legacy technology.
and reduction
of legacyof
technology.​
Capabilities

Our perspective

Tech-forward strategy

Build differentiating capabilities in-house by augmenting the internal skill base;
carefully weigh options to buy, build, or compose modular architecture through
best-of-breed solutions

Data management for AI world

Upgrade data management and underlying architecture to support machine-learning
use cases at scale by leveraging cloud, streaming data, and real-time analytics

Modern API1 architecture

Leverage modern cloud-native tooling to enable a scalable API platform supporting
complex orchestrations while creating experience-enhancing integrations across
the ecosystem

Intelligent infrastructure

Implement infrastructure as code across on-premises and cloud environments;
increase platform resiliency by adopting AIOps to support deep diagnostics, autorecoverability, and auto-scale

Hollowing the core

Distribute transaction processing across the enterprise stack; selectively identify
components that can be externalized to drive broader reuse, standardization, and
efficiency

Implement robust cybersecurity in the hybrid infrastructure; secure data and
Cybersecurity and control tiers applications through zero-trust design principles and centralized command-andcontrol centers
1

Application programming interface.

—

Modern API architecture. APIs are the
connective tissue enabling controlled access
to services, products, and data, both within
the bank and beyond. Within the bank, APIs
reduce the need for silos, increase reusability
of technology assets, and promote flexibility
in the technology architecture. Beyond the
bank, APIs accelerate the ability to partner
externally, unlock new business opportunities,
and enhance customer experiences. While
APIs can unlock significant value, it is critical to
start by defining where they are to be used and
establish centralized governance to support
their development and curation.¹2

—

Intelligent infrastructure. As companies
in diverse industries increase the share of
workload handled on public and private
cloud infrastructure, there is ample evidence
that cloud-based platforms allow for the
higher scalability and resilience crucial to an
AI-first strategy.13 Additionally, cloud-based
infrastructure reduces costs for IT maintenance
and enables self-serve models for development
teams, which enable rapid innovation cycles by
providing managed services (e.g., setting up new
environments in minutes instead of days).

¹2 Renny Thomas, Vinayak HV, Raphael Bick, and Shwaitang Singh, “Ten lessons for building a winning retail and small-business digital lending
franchise,” November 2019, McKinsey.com.

¹3 Arul Elumalai and Roger Roberts, “Unlocking business acceleration in a hybrid cloud world,” August 2019, McKinsey.com.

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

13

Layer 4: Transitioning to the platform operating
model
The AI-first bank of the future will need a new
operating model for the organization, so it can
achieve the requisite agility and speed and
unleash value across the other layers. While
most banks are transitioning their technology
platforms and assets to become more modular
and flexible, working teams within the bank
continue to operate in functional silos under
suboptimal collaboration models and often lack
alignment of goals and priorities.
The platform operating model envisions crossfunctional business-and-technology teams
organized as a series of platforms within the bank.
Each platform team controls their own assets
(e.g., technology solutions, data, infrastructure),
budgets, key performance indicators, and
talent. In return, the team delivers a family of
products or services either to end customers of
the bank or to other platforms within the bank.
In the target state, the bank could end up with
three archetypes of platform teams. Business
platforms are customer- or partner-facing teams
dedicated to achieving business outcomes in
areas such as consumer lending, corporate
lending, and transaction banking. Enterprise
platforms deliver specialized capabilities and/
or shared services to establish standardization
throughout the organization in areas such as
collections, payment utilities, human resources,
and finance. And enabling platforms enable the
enterprise and business platforms to deliver
cross-cutting technical functionalities such as
cybersecurity and cloud architecture.
By integrating business and technology in
jointly owned platforms run by cross-functional
teams, banks can break up organizational silos,
increasing agility and speed and improving the
alignment of goals and priorities across the
enterprise.

The journey to becoming an AI-first bank entails
transforming capabilities across all four layers
of the capability stack. Ignoring challenges or
underinvesting in any layer will ripple through all,
resulting in a sub-optimal stack that is incapable
of delivering enterprise goals.
A practical way to get started is to evaluate
how the bank’s strategic goals (e.g., growth,
profitability, customer engagement, innovation)
can be materially enabled by the range of AI
technologies—and dovetailing AI goals with the
strategic goals of the bank. Once this alignment
is in place, bank leaders should conduct a
comprehensive diagnostic of the bank’s starting
position across the four layers, to identify areas
that need key shifts, additional investments
and new talent. They can then translate these
insights into a transformation roadmap that spans
business, technology, and analytics teams.
Equally important is the design of an execution
approach that is tailored to the organization. To
ensure sustainability of change, we recommend
a two-track approach that balances short-term
projects that deliver business value every quarter
with an iterative build of long-term institutional
capabilities. Furthermore, depending on their
market position, size, and aspirations, banks need
not build all capabilities themselves. They might
elect to keep differentiating core capabilities
in-house and acquire non-differentiating
capabilities from technology vendors and
partners, including AI specialists.
For many banks, ensuring adoption of AI
technologies across the enterprise is no longer
a choice, but a strategic imperative. Envisioning
and building the bank’s capabilities holistically
across the four layers will be critical to success.

Suparna Biswas is a partner, Shwaitang Singh is an associate partner, and Renny Thomas is a senior partner, all in McKinsey’s
Mumbai office. Brant Carson is a partner in the Sydney office, and Violet Chung is a partner in the Hong Kong office.
The authors would like to thank Milan Mitra, Anushi Shah, Arihant Kothari, and Yihong Wu for their contributions to this article.
Copyright © 2020 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

14

AI-bank of the future: Can banks meet the AI challenge?

