Data machine: the insurers using AI to reshape the industry | Financial Times

1 of 6

https://www.ft.com/content/d3bd46cb-75d4-40ff-a0cd-6d7f33d58d7f

Insurance

Data machine: the insurers using AI to reshape the industry
Groups are building detailed customer profiles to inform pricing and try to influence behaviour

AI allows insurers such as Ping An to produce highly individualised profiles of customer risk that evolve in real time © FT montage;
Alamy, Dreamstime

Ian Smith in London AUGUST 16 2021

Take your medicine when the app tells you, do your exercise and eat well. As long as
you “show good compliance” and share the data, you will reduce your health risks —
and your insurance premium.
This is how Xie Guotong — the chief healthcare scientist at Chinese insurer Ping An —
describes its combined insurance and digital “disease management” service for people
with type-2 diabetes. Powered by artificial intelligence, it is just one example of a big
shift going on in the industry.
AI, which sifts data and aims to learn like humans, is allowing insurers to produce
highly individualised profiles of customer risk that evolve in real time. In parts of the
market, it is being used to refine or replace the traditional model of an annual
premium, creating contracts that are informed by factors including customer
behaviour.
In some cases, insurers are using it to decide whether they want to take a customer on
in the first place.
22.08.21, 17:16

Data machine: the insurers using AI to reshape the industry | Financial Times

2 of 6

https://www.ft.com/content/d3bd46cb-75d4-40ff-a0cd-6d7f33d58d7f

New York-listed car insurer Root offers potential customers a test drive, tracks them
using an app, and then chooses whether it wants to insure them. Driving behaviour is
also the number one factor in the price of policy, it said.
UK start-up Zego, which specialises in vehicle insurance for gig-economy workers
such as Uber drivers, offers a product that monitors customers after they have bought
cover and promises a lower renewal price for safer drivers.
The theory with such policies is that customers end up paying a fairer price for their
individual risk, and insurers are better able to predict losses. Some insurers say it also
gives them more opportunity to influence behaviour and even prevent claims from
happening.

New York-listed car insurer Root oﬀers potential customers a test drive, tracks them using an app, and then chooses whether it
wants to insure them © Root insurance

“Insurance is strongly moving from payment after claim to prevention,” said Cristiano
Borean, chief financial officer at Generali, Italy’s largest insurer.
For a decade, Generali has offered pay-how-you-drive policies that reward safer
drivers with lower premiums. In its home market, it also offers AI-enabled driver
feedback in an app, and plans to pilot this in other countries. “Everything which can
allow you to interact and reduce your risk, is in our interest as an insurer.”

22.08.21, 17:16

Data machine: the insurers using AI to reshape the industry | Financial Times

3 of 6

https://www.ft.com/content/d3bd46cb-75d4-40ff-a0cd-6d7f33d58d7f

But the rise of AI-powered insurance worries researchers that this new way of doing
things creates unfairness and could even undermine the risk-pooling model that is
key to the industry, making it impossible for some people to find cover.
“Yes, you won’t pay for the claims of your accident-prone neighbour, but then again,
no one else will then pay for your claims — just you,” said Duncan Minty, an
independent consultant on ethics in the sector. There is a danger, he added, of “social
sorting”, where groups of people perceived as riskier cannot buy insurance.

Behaviour-driven cover
Ping An’s type-2 diabetes insurance product is powered by AskBob, its AI-powered
“clinical decision support system” used by doctors across China.
For diabetes sufferers, the AI is trained on data showing incidence of complications
such as strokes. It then analyses the individual customer’s health via an app to
develop a care plan, which is reviewed and tweaked by a doctor together with the
patient.
The AI monitors the patient — through an app and a blood-glucose monitor — finetuning its predictions of the likelihood of complications as it goes. Patients that buy
the linked insurance are promised a lower premium at renewal if they follow the plan.

22.08.21, 17:16

Data machine: the insurers using AI to reshape the industry | Financial Times

4 of 6

https://www.ft.com/content/d3bd46cb-75d4-40ff-a0cd-6d7f33d58d7f

But AI experts worry about the consequences of using health data to calculate
insurance premiums.
Such an approach “entrenches a view of health not as human wellbeing and
flourishing, but as something that is target-based and cost-driven,” said Mavis
Machirori, senior researcher at the Ada Lovelace Institute.
It might favour those who are digitally connected and live near open spaces, while
“the lack of clear rules around what counts as health data leaves the door open to
misuse”, she added.
Zego’s “intelligent cover”, as the company calls it, offers a discount to drivers that sign
up for monitoring. Its pricing model uses a mix of inputs, including information such
as age, together with machine-learning models that analyse real-time data such as fast
braking and cornering. Safer driving should push down the cost of renewal, Zego said.
It also plans to provide feedback to customers through its app to help them manage
their risk.
“If you’re on a monthly renewing policy with us, we’d be looking at tracking that over
time with you and showing you what you can do to bring down your monthly cost,”
said Vicky Wills, the start-up’s chief technology officer.
She added: “I think this is a trend we are actually going to see more and more —
insurance becoming more of a proactive risk management tool rather than the safety
net that it has been before.”

Monitoring bias
Campaigners warn, however, that data can be taken out of context — there are often
good reasons to brake heavily. And some fear longer-term consequences from
collecting so much data.
“Will your insurer use that Instagram picture of a powerful car you’re about to post as
a sign that you’re a risky driver? They might,” said Nicolas Kayser-Bril, a reporter at
AlgorithmWatch, a non-profit group that researches “automated decision-making”.

22.08.21, 17:16

Data machine: the insurers using AI to reshape the industry | Financial Times

5 of 6

https://www.ft.com/content/d3bd46cb-75d4-40ff-a0cd-6d7f33d58d7f

Regulators are clearly worried about the potential for AI systems to embed
discrimination. A working paper in May from Eiopa, the top EU insurance regulator,
said companies should “make reasonable efforts to monitor and mitigate biases from
data and AI systems”.
Problems can creep in, experts say, when AI replicates a human decision-making
process that is itself biased, or uses unrepresentative data.

Shameek Kundu, head of financial services at TruEra, a firm that analyses AI models,
proposes four checks for insurers: that data is being interpreted correctly and in
context; that the model works well for different segments of the population; that
permission is sought from a customer in transparent communication; and that
customers have a recourse if they think they have been mistreated.

Detecting fraud
Insurers such as Root are also using AI to identify false claims, for example to try to
spot discrepancies between when and where an accident took place, and information
contained in the claim.

22.08.21, 17:16

Data machine: the insurers using AI to reshape the industry | Financial Times

6 of 6

https://www.ft.com/content/d3bd46cb-75d4-40ff-a0cd-6d7f33d58d7f

Third-party providers such as France’s Shift Technology, meanwhile, offer insurers a
service that can identify if the same photo, for example of a damaged car, has been
used in multiple claims.
US-listed Lemonade is also a big user of AI. Insurance is “a business of using past
data to predict future events,” said the company’s co-founder, Daniel Schreiber. “The
more predictive data an insurer has . . . the better.” It uses AI to speed up the process
and cut the cost of claims processing.
But it caused a social-media furore earlier this year when it tweeted about how its AI
scours claims videos for indications of fraud, picking up on “non-verbal cues”.
Lemonade later clarified that it used facial recognition software to try to spot if the
same person made multiple claims under different identities. It added that it did not
let AI automatically reject claims and that it had never used “phrenology” or
“physiognomy” — assessing someone’s character based on their facial features or
expression.
But the episode encapsulated worries about the industry building up an ever more
detailed picture of its customers.
“People often ask how ethical a firm’s AI is,” Minty said. “What they should be asking
about is how far ethics is taken into account by the people who design the AI, feed it
data and put it to use making decisions.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2021. All rights reserved.

22.08.21, 17:16

