From mystery to mastery:
Unlocking the business value
of Artificial Intelligence in the
insurance industry

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 3

1.

Introduction

4

2.

Turbulent times ahead

7

AI is the enabler for disruption

3.	There’s more to AI than robots

11

4.	Lost in translation

17

5.

The road to business value

23

6.

Seize the opportunity

29

Act now

39

AI technology is poised to make a difference

Apply our Use Case Formula to leverage AI in your business

7.

AI creates tangible business value in four distinct ways

Insurers have yet to unlock the full potential of AI

4 |

1.
Introduction
On January 25th, 2017, sixty-eight years after it was published, George Orwell’s book
Nineteen Eighty-Four became the number one best-selling book on Amazon. With its
eerily accurate predictions about advanced technology becoming an integral part of
everyday life, the book’s revived popularity only hints at the massive surge of excitement
surrounding one specific subject: Artificial Intelligence (AI). The numbers tell the same
story: deals to AI startups enabling computers to mimic human intelligence and decision
behavior increased 4.6x, from 150 in 2012 to 698 in 20161. With a combined funding of
USD 4.8B in 20162 and a projected overall spend of USD 47B by 20203, a world in which AI
is prevalent is no longer mere fiction.
However, not all the book’s predictions have come true. Nineteen Eighty-Four painted
a futuristic picture of a totalitarian Big Brother regime that controls every breath of its
inhabitants, but a look at the world today reveals the fundamentally positive impact of AI
on organizations, entire industries, and life itself. Tech giant Google, for instance, has cut
its data center energy usage by 15% by applying its DeepMind AI technology to predict
the incoming computational load and adjusting its power consumption patterns4. In
the financial industry, the world’s largest asset manager, BlackRock Inc., is now entrusting more of its USD 5.1T in assets to robot stock pickers to decide what to buy and sell
instead of human portfolio managers. And car manufacturer Tesla has achieved a 40%
drop in road accidents with a new AI feature deployed in its cars, compared to models
without the feature5. Apart from organizations, our own homes are also getting more intelligent. In 2017, 35.6M people in the US will have used a voice-activated assistant device
at least once a month. That’s a jump of almost 130% over 20166. And we expect numbers
in Europe and Asia to follow this trend as well.
With more than 85% of customer interactions predicted to be managed without a human by 20207, the evident business value of AI is attracting the attention of CEOs and
top managers regardless of industry. That said, while almost all industries have already
seen major success with AI or have started investing, some are lagging behind. With only
1.33% of insurance companies investing in AI compared to 32% in software and internet
technologies, the insurance industry is still lagging behind the world’s AI movement8.
Executives in insurance, however, are experiencing a particular sense of urgency to act: in
few other industries is AI’s underlying sustenance – data – as abundant and important as
in the insurance industry – making the mastery of this area of technology a key competitive differentiator for insurers moving forward into the digital future.
But how can executives guide their organizations to reap the benefits from AI and exploit
the benefits that beckon? To enable businesses to move from mystery to mastery, this
paper presents a set of tools and frameworks that provide key insights into the fundamentals of AI technology, including the inner workings of Machine Learning. We will
cover the art and science of defining concrete AI use cases and the models of AI value
creation to deliver top- and bottom-line impact. Moreover, we aim to give an insight into
the current status of and future outlook for AI use cases that will impact the 300-year-old
insurance industry as it rapidly approaches disruptive transformation.

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 5

4.6x

projected
overall spend of

increase of
AI deals from
2012 to 2016

$ 47B
by 2020

35.6M
people in the
US will have a
voice-activated
assistant in
2017

1.33%

of insurance companies
invest in AI in 2016

With a combined funding of USD
4.8B in 2016, a world in which AI is
prevalent is no longer mere fiction.

6 |

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 7

2.
AI is the enabler for
disruption
2.1 The future is now – technology-enabled
innovation in insurance
Deterioration of traditional profit pools, changing competitor landscapes, technological innovations and changing customer expectations are calling for a new perspective
on insurance. However, traditional insurance players are often slow to react to the new
demands and possibilities of the digital era. This opens up the playing field to InsurTech
startups and Tech incumbents who capitalize on new business models and improved customer experiences. The new players promise and deliver faster claim payments, greater
price transparency and on-demand policies, while decreasing the cost and the resources
required (Figure 1). Global VC funding of these new businesses totaled USD 1.7B across
173 deals in 2016 as compared to USD 0.14B among 28 deals in 2011 – clearly increasing
the seriousness of competition for traditional insurance players (Figure 1).9
At the heart of the rise of these new players is the improvement in existing digital technologies and the emergence of new ones. These technologies enable practitioners to
rethink the 300-year-old insurance industry at every level, from business model to value
chain and from customer interaction to automation. In reshaping the industry’s datahungry and mostly standardized processes as well as the resource-intensive handling
of their customer relationships, one technology stands out as particularly promising for
insurers: Artificial Intelligence. Ninety-five percent of insurance executives intend to start
or continue investing in AI capabilities in the future10, while investments in AI have already
increased by 69% between 2011 and 2014, totaling a staggering USD 5B in 2014.11

Ninety-eight percent of insurance
executives believe that cognitive
computing will play a disruptive
role in the insurance industry.

8 |

Figure 1: Value proposition and Venture Capital funding of selected InsurTech startups

Clover

Fabric

Funding: USD 285M

Funding: USD 2.5M

HQ: San Francisco, CA, USA

HQ: Brooklyn, NY, USA

A health insurance startup that leverages AI by

A life insurance startup that uses AI to generate

using data and software to build clinical profiles

quotes for accidental death claims. Simpli-

of people, and identify gaps in care. These gaps

fied processes enable a life insurance sign-up

in care are filled with visits and a free choice of

process in just two minutes. The browser-based

doctor to avoid costly hospital stays.

product is available on tablet, notebook, and
mobile.

GetSafe

Trov

Funding: Undisclosed

Funding: USD 87M

HQ: Heidelberg, Germany

HQ: San Francisco, CA, USA

An InsurTech startup that takes advantage of

An on-demand property insurance startup in

AI by advising customers on which insurance

which an AI chatbot handles claims. Insurance

policies to purchase and by collecting relevant

can be started immediately via an app to cover

information. GetSafe also provides customers

damage, loss, and theft. Like dating apps, cus-

with an app to manage all their insurance poli-

tomers can swipe insurance on their valuables

cies in one place.

on or off.

Lemonade
Funding: USD 60M
HQ: New York, NY, USA
A property and casualty peer to peer insurance
that uses AI-powered claims analysis. Eighteen
anti-fraud algorithms are run on image and
video claims information from the customer
and a response is given to within minutes.
At Lemonade, small insurance groups pay a
fixed fee into a claims pool. Surpluses from the
claims pool go to chosen common causes or
back to the peers.

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 9

2.2 Data is the new currency –
the importance of AI to win in a
“datafied” world
One key reason why AI will prove to be crucial is the everincreasing “datafication” of business interactions, private life,
and public life. In the age of digitalization, more and more
data is being collected – by organizations, governments,
households, and individuals. Already today, 2.5M terabytes of

The success of using data to one’s advantage therefore
depends on the appropriate tools to process it – and this is
where AI comes in. By intelligently and independently sifting
through huge amounts of data with powerful algorithms, AI
goes beyond “just” data analytics in generating novel insights
and automating repetitive tasks. AI thereby offers great opportunities for optimizing existing and enabling new procedures, giving a competitive edge to businesses today and in
the future.

data are created every day.13 That quantity is due to increase

However, understanding how AI and more specifically Ma-

exponentially on account of new sources like sensors on

chine Learning turns data into knowledge and action and how

property and machines, connected devices, mobile devices,

this relates to hyped topics, such as chatbots or robo-advi-

and digitalization of processes, together with customers’ in-

sors, can be challenging. To be able to leverage AI effectively,

creasing willingness to share personal information – provided

organizations need to combine a technological view with a

they receive a benefit in return (Figure 2).14

business view – in other words, an understanding of what is

An “arms race” has begun as to who can gather the most data
in an effort to achieve a competitive advantage. However, the

technologically feasible today with an understanding of how
AI can create value for an organization.

data must be meaningfully processed to access its value, as
illustrated by the following quote of a Chief Underwriting
Officer (EMEA): “We have a lot of data but the question
remains what to do with it.”15

Figure 2: Proportion of customers who would be willing to track their
behavior and share this data with insurers for a more accurate premium

49%

11%

45%

17%

38%

14%

No

Don‘t know

40%

38%

48%

HEALTH

HOME

MOTOR

Yes

10 |

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 11

3.
AI technology is poised
to make a difference
3.1 Don’t believe the sci-fi movies –
where AI stands today
Recent quotes like the one by Stephen Hawking below are often used as eye-catchers,
but tend to portray a negative picture of an almighty AI. Despite the speed of AI developments today, the current status of the field by no means resembles a villainous, freewilled AI as portrayed in science fiction movies. Instead, AI has slowly but steadily begun
to affect our lives by facilitating many of our everyday tasks and activities, from scheduling meetings, to selecting movies, to driving cars.
The type of AI often feared in the media is referred to as Artificial Superintelligence
(ASI) – an omnipotent AI that significantly outperforms its human counterparts in any
area or task. In contrast, an AI matching humans’ capabilities and ways of thinking is
referred to as Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). However, both ASI and AGI are still a
long way from today’s reality.

STEPHEN

HAWKING

The rise of powerful AI will
be either the best or the worst
thing ever to happen to humanity.
We do not know which.

12 |

Figure 3: How smart is Artificial Intelligence?17

INTELLIGENCE

Superintelligence

ASI

Narrow level

ANI

Today

General/human level

AGI

2030

2060

EMERGENCE

The state of AI feasible today is referred to as Artificial

the human champion of the Chinese board game Go. Yet, the

Narrow Intelligence (ANI) (Figure 3). ANI has seen a recent

same ANI would be unable to learn how to play chess, even

boom in applications – enabled predominantly by exponential

though chess is significantly less complex than the game of

increases in available processing power paired with advances

Go.16

in gathering, storing, and transferring data. However, each
ANI is still only able to complete very narrow, clearly defined
tasks within one application area and unable to build on its

Underlying the applications of ANI are a multitude of instruments rooted in data science – the most important one being
Machine Learning (ML). In contrast to traditional program-

capabilities to learn tasks outside this application area. In a
specific task, however, an ANI can become as good as or better than any human – as illustrated by Google’s ANI that beat

ming and data science, an ML algorithm learns the transformation rules to create a desired output based on a given
input by itself (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Difference between traditional programming and machine learning

Input

&

Transformation
rules

Output

Input

&

Output

Transformation
rules

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 13

Figure 5: Machine learning training types18+19

Supervised
Learning

Unsupervised
Learning

Reinforcement
Learning

is a method of training an algo-

is a method of training an algo-

is a method of training an

rithm on labeled data, meaning

rithm on unlabeled data, meaning

algorithm on unlabeled data

that parts of a document are

the algorithm identifies concepts

where the output is rated by the

“tagged”. For example, in a con-

and derives conclusions entirely

researcher as either correct or in-

tract, items like the contract par-

on its own. For example, in the

correct. Over time, the algorithm

ties’ street, postal code, etc. may

Google Brain project an algorithm

can produce the correct output

be tagged to enable the algorithm

learned to detect faces and cats

based on learning from reinforce-

to identify addresses in contracts

in videos by clustering common

ment of correct answers and pun-

by knowing which elements con-

structures (without knowing the

ishment for incorrect ones. For

stitute an address and where to

definition of a cat or face prior to

example, an algorithm learned

look for them. Supervised learn-

analysis).

to play Super Mario by reinforce-

ing is the most common method

ment, being punished for “dying”

for training ML algorithms today.

in the game and reinforced for
“surviving” and collecting points.

The ML algorithm learns the transformation rules by itera-

A human would require no more than a handful of pictures

tively reducing the deviation between the created and the

to learn the same skill. However, unlike humans, ML is un-

desired output – a process referred to as training. While

able to make abstractions and inferences from only a few

different forms of training exist, today’s most prominent form

data points. Over time, as the amount of data processed by

of training is the so-called supervised learning – a method

the algorithm increases, predictions become more accurate.

requiring large amounts of labeled data to train the algorithm

Facebook’s “Deep Face” can identify a specific face with 97%

(Figure 5).

accuracy, which equals human ability.

Facebook’s facial recognition for example, an image recognition ML algorithm20 independently learned how to identify
and detect human faces. This nine-layer neural network was
trained with four million images of faces of 4,000 individuals, meaning the algorithm was exposed to 1,000 different
pictures of each person in order to enable the algorithm to
be able to reliably identify the specific person among others.

14 |

3.2 Machine Learning is not the
full picture – understanding AI
applications
Typically, an AI can either be trained from scratch using a
Machine Learning framework, such as Google’s TensorFlow
or Apache Spark’s MLlib, or be bought as a pre-trained model.
These pre-trained models are typically specialized in a certain
area such as voice or image and video recognition, text analytics, biometrics, sentiment detection or decision management (Figure 6).

a wearable such as headphones. It will soon be possible to
integrate Alexa into any external app or website to enhance
it with a natural language layer. Capital One has built a skill
for Alexa, which can be activated in the Alexa app, to enable transactions and account balance checks using voice
commands. A customer can ask Alexa about their account
balance (speech input); Alexa then analyzes the intent of the
question, connects to the customer’s Capital One account
(database) to retrieve the account balance, and presents the
answer in spoken natural language to the customer (speech
output) (Figure 7). An AI application includes not just the
underlying ML algorithm but also retrieving relevant informa-

For example, Amazon’s Alexa is already trained to understand

tion from a database and presenting it through an interface

several languages. Companies can build certain “Alexa skills”

to the user.

that are then integrated in the Alexa app, Amazon Echo, or

Figure 6: Exemplary list of pre-trained AI models

1.
Speech/voice
recognition

2.
Sentiment
detection

3.
Recommendation
engine

Understand and interpret the

Detect and analyze emotions in

Interpret results and recommend

spoken word. For example, Pop

the written or spoken word. For

appropriate actions. For example,

Up Archive automatically tags, in-

example, Beyond Verbal e
 xtracts

Zendrive uses sensor data on

dexes and transcribes a
 udio files

emotions from raw voice clips in

smart­phones to analyze driving b
 e-

with speaker d
 etection.

real time.

havior and re-commend behavior
changes.

4.
Text analytics
and NLP

5.
Pattern/
anomaly detection

6.
Automatic decision
management

Understand and interpret written

Detect patterns and anomalies to

Derive and automatically apply

text and whole documents. For

derive conclusions. For example,

rules and logic in AI systems. For

example, x.ai’s personal assistant

Cyence models cyber riskbased

example, Boomtrain enables auto-

Amy“reads” emails to find sched-

on human and m
 achine data

matic,personalized marketing b
y

uling related information to b
 ook

cluster analysis.

targeting only s pecific customers.

meetings in t he user’s c alendar.

4.
Natural Language
Generation (NLG)

5.
Object detection

6.
Biometrics

Interpret and analyze objects

Uniquely identify a person or

Generate and deliver information

shown on images or in video. For

measure and interpret human

in natural language. For example,

example, Nauto uses video analy-

physical states (such as emotion or

Narrative Science offers easy-to-

sis to offer guidanceand insights

intent) from biological character-

understand reports in n
 atural

to driversin real time.

istics, such as f acial structures or

language b
 ased on c ompany d
 ata.

heart rate. Forexample, Bionym
enables authentication through
cardiac rhythm measured by a
wristband.

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 15

Figure 7: Simplified demonstration of communication transfer between AI and users

User

Text
Images
Speech
etc.

Text
Images
Speech
etc.

App
Website
Robot
etc.

AI application

Cloud solution,
Company server
etc.

Machine Learning Models

Speech/voice recognition

Sentiment detection

Text Analytics/
Natural Language Processing

Pattern/anomaly
detection

Natural Language
Generation

Recommendation engine

Object recognition

etc.

16 |

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 17

4.
Apply our Use Case Formula to
leverage AI in your business
4.1 Know what you want – the importance of
defining a specific use case
The wide array of possible AI applications is appealing for businesses, yet the extremely
narrow nature of today’s AI applications is severely complicating the identification of a
relevant starting point. As a result, almost 40% of practitioners who have not yet invested
in AI don’t know what AI can be used for in their business.22 In order to exploit relevant
opportunities, businesses must face the challenge of identifying concrete use cases for AI.
In contrast to the purely technological view on AI applications, which focuses on the ML
model and interface (see Figure 7), an AI use case describes the underlying technology
and observable functionality from the perspective of the user and the resulting value. A
use case hence represents the business view of an AI application.

Almost 40% of practitioners
who have not yet invested in
AI don’t know what AI can be
used for in their business.

18 |

4.2 Apply the magic Formula –
the three dimensions of a Use
Case Formula

Using these three dimensions, a use case can be described

We reviewed publicly available information on nearly 200 AI

First and foremost, a use case must serve a functionality.

vendors of ML models and AI applications and categorized

The spectrum of possible functionalities includes an inform-

them according to their predominantly deployed ML models

ing, recommending or deciding AI solution in a business

(Figure 8). By determining the fundamental characteristics

process. Within each of these categories, many applications

that differentiate one use case from another, we have identi-

are already feasible today, but even more will emerge as AI

fied three distinctive dimensions. These dimensions encom-

technology continues to develop.

based on our Use Case Formula: Do x (functionality) based on
y (data) in order to address z (need). Figure 9 describes the
formula with the content of each part in detail.

pass the functionality, input data and addressed customer
need of an AI application.

Leading Vendors

Figure 8: Dataset of 187 leading AI vendors categorized according to predominantly deployed ML models

VENDORS OF SINGLE ML MODELS OR APPLICATIONS
BASED ON SINGLE ML MODEL
Speech/voice recognition
Sentiment detection

3
1

Recommendation engine

31

Text analytics and NLP

26
27

Pattern/anomaly detection
19

Automatic decision management
Natural Language Generation

4
19

Object detection
Biometrics

4

VENDORS OF COMBINED ML MODELS OR APPLICATIONS
BASED ON COMBINED ML MODELS
Two dominant ML Models
Three dominant ML Models

43
10

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 19

In performing any of these functionalities, the AI application

In order to derive tangible business value from a use case, a

can either serve an internal customer, such as an employee,

third ingredient must be included in the Formula: customer

or an external customer, such as an end user. For example,

and organizational needs. A use case must always address

the KLM chatbot on Facebook Messenger informs external

and resolve a user need in order to create value.

customers about their flight status or issues their boarding
pass. In contrast, KIA uses sentiment analysis of customer
feedback on social media sites to inform internal marketing employees of the success or failure of an advertising
campaign.

Organizational needs can include becoming more efficient or
keeping knowledge within the company. (External) customer
needs refer to, for example, more personalized communication with customer service agents or receiving an affordable
product price.

The second ingredient necessary to define a use case is data.
Without high quantity and quality of data, it is impossible
to get an AI application up and running. In fact, for modern
data-hungry ML models, performance is more dependent on
the quantity and quality of the data than the algorithm doing
the learning, partially because many ML models are available
as open source, such as Google’s TensorFlow or the popular
Scikit-learn.

To define concrete use cases for AI, all three ingredients need
to be combined into the Use Case Formula, thereby organizing all crucial characteristics and information about a use case
in a relevant structure. The categories of possible “input values” provided for each ingredient of the Formula outline the
comprehensive playing field for AI applications, whereas the
examples given in each category may need to be extended
and adjusted to a specific industry. Practitioners can analyze

There are four data types that can act as input for a ML

existing case studies or brainstorm novel use cases by refer-

model: company data, such as call logs or manuals; public

ring to the Use Case Formula’s three dimensions and possible

data, such as Wikipedia or other open source content free to

“input values” in each dimension.

use without permission; third-party data, such as Facebook
user profiles, which can’t be used without permission; and
lastly customer data, such as data gathered through sensors
at home or in a car.

For analysis purposes, the Use Case Formula can be applied
to abstract an underlying AI use case from e.g., a media report about a business successfully leveraging AI by synthesizing the most relevant information into a pointed use case

Depending on the data type used, time and effort must go
into preparing and cleaning appropriate training sets. AI applications are not limited to run on structured data but can
also process unstructured data, which accounts for about
80% of today’s data.24 For example, Facebook leverages a
combination of structured user profile data and unstructured
public data, including e.g., news sources, to help eliminate
fake news.25

definition.
For ideation purposes, practitioners can play through different meaningful combinations of the “input values”, keeping in
mind that not all combinations are feasible or valuable today
and interdisciplinary expert advice should be sought in the
process.
Once a valuable use case is identified, it can be effectively
communicated using the Use Case Formula.

PETER

NORVIG

|

RESEARCH

DIRECTOR

AT

GOOGLE

We don’t have better algorithms,
we just have more data.

20 |

Figure 9: The Use Case Formula and its three dimensions

“Do x (functionality) based on y (data)
For example, Spotify recommends new artists and songs (functionality)
based on previously played genres/artists (data) in order to make
relevant content easily and quickly accessible to users (need).

Functionality

Input data

Inform

Recommend

Decide

Company

Public

Provide insights based

Advice on appropriate

Perform actions based on

Product literature

Wikipedia

on one or a combination

actions based on insights

derived implications from

of several data sources

generated from pro-

processed data sources

Manuals/specifications

Industry definitions

(manuals, sales data, etc.)

cessed data sources (user

(user behavior, customer

Guidelines

Open source content

behavior, public historic

emails, voice commands,

data, etc.)

etc.)

Procedures/policies

Regulatory guidelines

cluster customer seg-

Common recommend-

Common deciding ap-

Journals

Images

ments, evaluate customer

ing applications are e.g.,

plications are e.g., adjust

Best practices

Type systems

behavior, predict disease

suggest new products

prices in real time, send

outbreak, etc.

to customers, prescribe

emails to customers,

FAQs

etc.

medical treatment plans

schedule meetings, trans-

for patients, guide cus-

fer money, etc.

Common informing applications are e.g.,

tomers through the product selection process, etc.

Certification tests
Brochures
Call logs
Images
Client profiles
Usage data
Sensor data
etc.

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 21

in order to address z (need).”

Customer and
organizational needs
Third-party

Customer

Product

Communi­cation Operations

Subject matter domain

Feedback data

Offering

Channel

Processes

Smart home data

Adequate to fulfill needs

Reachable through any

Efficient use of time and

of customers

channel

money

Personalized to individual

Continuous interaction

Accurate processes with-

customers

across channels

out mistakes

Available at any given

etc.

Engaging tasks for em-

content
News feeds
Market data
Business reports
Industry intelligence
Risk analysis
assessments
Industry definitions
Images
Taxonomy/ontology
Market data
etc.

Driving behavior
Fitness/health records
Sensor data
etc.

time
etc.

Touchpoints
Trustworthy customer

ployee
etc.

Cost

service

Resources

Affordable product price

Helpful problem-solving

Effective resolving of

and solution recommen-

problems and fulfilling

dations

tasks

Personal service and

Knowledgeable employ-

conversations

ees

Timely responses and

etc.

Transparent cost structure
etc.
Convenience
Intuitive interface and
use of product
Flexible use rates of
product
Private use of data
Fast product delivery
etc.

help
etc.

22 |

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 23

5.
AI creates tangible business
value in four distinct ways
5.1 Know where to start – four models
of value creation for AI
The Use Case Formula provides the required generic structure for defining and describing AI use cases. However, it does not specify where to begin looking for use cases or
the context in which to place a use case. Having reviewed close to 200 vendors and their
clients, we found that a comprehensive overview of the AI value landscape in a business
context can be achieved by mapping AI use cases in a 2x2 matrix according to their type
of result and type of impact. This overview clusters use cases based on the type of value
created and can serve to define a starting point and context (Figure 10) for AI use cases.

ANDREW

NG

|

FOUNDER

OF

GOOGLE

BRAIN

Even though a lot of the buzz in AI has
been around large tech companies,
if you look across an entire economy,
really any Fortune 500 company can
create a lot of value with AI as well.

24 |

Figure 10: The AI value map – four areas of value creation

TYPE OF RESULT
Primary output of the AI solution, e.g., answer or action

Unknown
Solution generates a
new result previously
not known to exist

Known
Solution replicates one
(or several) results from
a set of predetermined
results

Operations discovery

Customer discovery

Ability to discover novel answers
or actions that serve to improve
speed and accuracy of internal
processes/decisions

Ability to discover novel answers
or actions that serve to improve
customer conversion and loyalty

Examples: Process mining,
scenario planning

Examples: Market segmentation,
product development

Operations efficacy

Customer efficacy

Ability to produce intended
answers or actions that serve to
improve speed and accuracy of
internal processes/decisions

Ability to produce intended
answers or actions that serve to
improve customer conversion
and loyalty

Examples: Customer service
automation, fraud detection

Examples: Recommendation
systems, pricing automation

Bottom-line
Cost reductions

Top-line
Revenue Increases

TYPE OF IMPACT
Primary intended ﬁnancial contribution of the AI solution

Eﬃcacy = ability to produce a desired or intended result
Top-line = measure of revenue or gross sales
Bottom-line = measure of net income

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 25

The type of result axis distinguishes whether an AI applica-

and reliability improvements. Top-line improvements are real-

tion produces unknown or known results. The replication of

ized through increases in revenue, such as reduced customer

known results matches input with a predetermined set of

churn or improved customer lifetime value. Combining the

answers or actions, e.g., a chatbot tries to understand the

two dimensions, four areas for value creation with AI emerge.

intent of the customer and retrieves the most appropriate
of a set of existing answers from a database. On the other
hand, the generation of previously unknown results creates
new insights and answers. These generative algorithms are
capable of things such as identifying new criteria based on
which they can more effectively segment customer groups or

Notably, many real-world use cases can create value in more
than one of the four value areas – particularly if they evolve
over time. The categorization into the four areas, however,
helps to define a clear starting point as well as to sharpen the
focus for the primary intent of an AI application.

design completely new products based on only a few given
parameters.
The type of impact axis distinguishes whether an AI application delivers financial impact on the top or bottom line.
Bottom-line improvements are achieved through reduced
costs, e.g., reduced need for highly qualified staff or quality

JUERGEN

MUELLER

|

CIO

OF

SAP

Recruiters spend 60% of their
time reading CVs. Why should
a person read 300 resumes if a
machine can propose the top 10?

26 |

5.2 Operations efficacy
AI applications reproducing known results with the primary intention to create bottomline impact enable operations efficacy, e.g., by automating repetitive tasks, identifying
fraudulent behavior, or making knowledge accessible in real-time. For example, JP Morgan has been able to save 360,000 work hours by automating part of their lawyer work by
leveraging an operations efficacy application.

JP Morgan
Machine Learning System COIN autonomously reviews and interprets commercial loan agreements.
Value: Saved 360,000 hours of lawyers’ and loan officers’ work with
an AI that needed only seconds for the same work and decreases
susceptibility to error.

5.3 Customer efficacy
Top-line impact can be delivered through AI applications targeted at customer efficacy
by employing AI to perform actions that are known to increase customer satisfaction and
consequently conversion and loyalty. Such tasks include in particular sales, marketing,
and pricing automation, as illustrated by the case study of The North Face.

The North Face
The North Face leverages IBM’s Watson as a personal shopping
assistant in their online shop to recommend products in natural
language based on qualifying questions about location, temperature,
etc.
Value: The solution supports customers in finding the right product
in a fast and convenient manner and has yielded an increase in clickthrough rates to 60%.

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 27

5.4 Operations discovery
AI applications for the generation of unknown results with the primary intention to deliver bottom-line impact enable operations discovery. Such applications may e.g., discover
new insights about process inefficiencies or cost drivers and serve to increase quality or
time and cost effectiveness. By implementing such a maintenance expert system, Korean
Air has been able to reduce maintenance lead times by 90%.

Korean Air
An expert system that discovers previously hidden relationships and
interdependencies in maintenance issues to solve problems faster.
Value: Reduced the number of flight delays and cancellations
caused by maintenance issues and shortened its maintenance lead
times by 90%.

5.5 Customer discovery
Alternatively, top-line impact can be delivered through AI applications targeted at customer discovery, i.e., discovering new insights, actions or products that serve to strengthen the relationship with the existing customer or the acquisition of new customers. Such
tasks can include e.g., the discovery of novel criteria for successful customer segmentation or data-driven product development, as illustrated by the case study of Netflix.

Netflix
Netflix leverages AI to tag its movie content, allowing for a detailed
analysis of play-and-search data, giving Netflix an understanding of
what a user really likes about a movie. Netflix combines the usage
data with metadata and ecosystem data, such as what is trending
in the news, in order to identify success criteria for original content
production.
Value: Netflix’s original content rates 11% higher than its licensed
content, yielding increased customer engagement and reduced
churn.

28 |

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 29

6.
Insurers have yet to unlock
the full potential of AI
In view of the fact that businesses across industries are reaping real benefits from AI,
it is uncontested that AI will also be a key enabler for insurance businesses to equip
themselves for the challenges and opportunities of their digital future. High labor costs,
regulatory requirements, intensifying competition with InsurTech startups, and changing
customer expectations are just some of the issues that can be addressed by leveraging
AI. Yet, the insurance industry is lagging behind tapping into AI’s potential compared to
other industries such as life sciences, retail, and manufacturing.26 By looking at the insurance value chain (see Figure 11), it becomes clear that there are numerous entry points
and possibilities. In order to obtain an overview of the industry’s current status quo and
put one’s own efforts as well as future value options into perspective, we analyzed the
insurance industry based on our value framework in the upcoming chapter.

The insurance industry is lagging
behind tapping into AI’s potential
compared to other industries such as
life sciences, retail, and manufacturing.

30 |

Figure 11: Potential AI use cases for the insurance value chain
(illustrative selected examples, technology’s state of the art could be less advanced)

Insurance
Value Chain

Product
development

Marketing &
sales

Underwriting &
risk-rating

Text analytics & NLP

Scan and structure existing policies and product descriptions to
develop future products faster
and more efficiently

Analyze customer feedback based
on support calls & social media
posts to develop new marketing
campaigns

Scan for ambiguities and rate
risks in insurance applications
based on claims to detect fraud
faster

Pattern/Anomaly
detection

Derive patterns for new products
based on customer feedback
analysis in to create more targeted products

Identify customer segments for
personalization based on cluster
analysis of feedback to target
specific customer groups

Predict premiums based on past
risk assessments to make risk
assessment more precise

Recommendation
engine

Analyze customer buying behavior based on sales data following
product recommendations to
improve offerings

Provide new sales leads based
on social media and purchase
data in order to gain new customers

Suggest risk categories for customers based on previous claims
and events to prevent human
errors

Conversational
service solutions

Use feedback data based on customer conversations with virtual
service agent to improve future
products

Use virtual sales agent to consult
and accompany the sales process
in order to achieve higher sales
targets

Use a chatbot to lead risk related
conversations based on natural
language data base to obtain
specific facts from customers

Speech
recognition

Identify customer pain points
with products through speech
analytics of feedback to improve
future products

Analyze customer speech – emotion detection included - based
on lead calls in order to improve
personalization

Detect fraud based on voice
analysis of customer calls in order
to improve security measures

Image and video
analysis & facial
recognition

Analyze customer emotions and
reactions based on customer
interview videos to test new
product

Recommend marketing messages
for promotion videos based on
public video analysis to improve
marketing effectiveness

Predict risk based on image/vide
analysis to improve accuracy

Natural language
generation

Generate new policy descriptions
for new products based on past
documents to increase operations efficiency

Generate marketing messages in
various styles based on public advertisements to improve targeting

Generate reports and written
documents based on internal
reports to improve operations
efficiency

Potential use case: Lead management

Potential use case: Fraud analytics

AI can provide support in pointing out positive leads to both

Annual fraud-related costs in the insurance industry are

sales and marketing by pulling value from respective data and

estimated to add up to billions of euros and an estimated

indicating potential quality leads that might not have been

amount of 10% of their overall claims expenditure. AI can

considered before. Insurance firms can achieve competi-

be used to, e.g., assist insurers during the claims handling

tive advantage by additionally enriching internal data with

process by querying the asserted events of an incident: If a

a multitude of sources e.g., information from social media

driver involved in a car accident indicates it was raining at the

campaigns or weblog clickstreams. AI can also deliver ad-

time of the event, negatively impacting his braking distance,

ditional value in offering personalized content by predicting

AI can check weather reports to confirm whether this was the

e.g., potential spend, suggested campaigns, and personalized

case. If a policyholder’s assumed conditions are invalidated

products for cross- and upsell to maximize sales and new

by the AI’s searches, this indicates that the claim could be

revenue. The personalized lead interaction with AI can also

fraudulent; the system can thus appropriately flag the case

be applied in call centers.

for further investigation by a human insurance agent.

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 31

Customer
servicing

Claims
management

Financial
assets

Operations

Generate structured feedback
reports based on customer
support requests to save time
& costs

Generate structured data sets
based on claims reports to process claims faster

Detect opportunities and issues
early on based on analysis of news
and social media data to improve
timely reactions

Transform process descriptions
into structured data that can be
analyzed to track effectiveness of
processes

Provide automatic matching of answers to customer inquiries based
on past customers questions in
order to automate service

Validate claims by checking
external data sources e.g., weather
reports for validation to save costs
of wrong evaluations

Integrate robo advisory into portfolio decisions based on automatic
market analysis to detect market
anomalies faster

Predict process workload based
on historical data in order to
prevent bottlenecks

Provide issue solving recommendations to customers based
on clustered historical service
data to save time

Recommend template for incoming claims based oWn historical
similar claim reports to process
claims more effectively

Integrate robo advisory into portfolio decisions based on automatic
market analysis to recommend
financial actions and decisions

Recommend suitable candidates
based on social network data
to improve future recruiting
purposes

Integrate virtual agent onto
customer service platform based
on product and service data to
improve customer experience

Provide chatbot interface for
claims reporting based on natural
language base and historical claims
data in order to improve efficiency

Supply internal, digital personal assistant based on financial data for
employees to look up specifics

Supply internal, digital personal assistant for scheduling of meetings
to improve internal efficiency

Improve customer communication directly based on emotion
detection during customer calls to
improve service

Automatic text production of
speech claims including emotions
and behavior based on phone calls
in order to improve efficiency

Analyze important investor calls of
financial asset providers to detect
potential issues early on

Produce automatic protocols
and key results based on spoken
word during meetings in order to
improve efficiency

Analyze customer emotions during service calls based live audio
feeds to improve communication
with customers

Define damage severity based on
photos taken by customers during
claims reports to improve speed
and convenience

Inform market forecasting by
evaluation news reports based
on public sources to improve
forecasting accuracy

Warn employees of workplace incidents based on security camera
feeds to improve workplace safety

Generate customer emails as
responses based structured input
data to optimize workload for
employees

Generate automatic claim reports
based on structured data to optimize workload for employees

Generate investor financial
reports based on structured
input to optimize workload and
consistency

Generate internal company
information material and blog
entries based on structured input
to increase transparency

Potential use case: Automated input management

Potential use case: Intelligent virtual assistants

One use case to use the steadily growing amount of available

Companies have used chatbots for customer service for a

data for insurance companies is automated input manage-

number of years, typically to replace or assist live agents in

ment, including input recognition, clustering and routing.

call centers for first level support or as an alternative to point-

By using Artificial Intelligence, it is possible to design a more

and-click interfaces for customers visiting websites. With the

efficient input management that avoids subsequent manual

advances in Natural Language Understanding and Processing,

work and that is able to learn from previous events. The new

this technology is now capable of being used in more complex

kind of input management can be divided into three major

customer communication, providing more and more natural

steps: Data Analysis – Data Clustering – Routing. These enable

conversations which rarely differ from those with humans.

the customer interface to route each issue to the right inter-

However, as long as there is no Artificial General Intelligence,

nal contact or solution provider.

customers will be routed to real people when it comes to
more complex issues.

32 |

6.1 The current status – insurers
leverage AI for improved efficacy
Recent efforts by insurers to implement AI have been focused
on automating repetitive tasks by using AI applications to
replicate known answers, yielding both top- and bottom line
improvements. Consequently, leading insurers are already
achieving operations and customer efficacy through the application of AI.

EXHIBIT

1:

FUKOKU

LIFE

In February 2017, Japanese Life insurer Fukoku
Mutual Life announced that it has introduced an AI
application based on IBM’s Watson explorer to boost
its operations efficacy in medical claims processing.

Operations efficacy

The application is tasked with calculating accurate

Among the most mature applications of AI in insurance is the

pay-outs based on details of the administered

automation of claims handling processes (Figure 12).

procedure, period of hospitalization, medical history

Traditionally, the claims processing department is the most
labor intensive and therefore the largest cost center for insurers. Meanwhile, work in claims processing is highly standardized and repetitive – and therefore extremely eligible for
automation through AI. Consequently, there are both great
incentives and high feasibility for insurers to automate claims
processing. Typically, insurers’ legacy systems are already

and insurance conditions. The application thus accesses medical certificates, hospital bills, and internal
claims history files and scans the insurance contract
for special coverage clauses to prevent payment
oversights. The accurate pay-out is calculated and is
submitted to a member of staff who approves and
then releases the pay-out.

capable of (partially) automated processes in quotation, con-

The application increased productivity by 30% and

tract, and claims. However, the modern AI applications can

yielded improvements in accuracy of pay-outs.

improve content recognition, prioritize more intelligently, and

Fukoku Life expects to see a return on investment in

even increase customer satisfaction by significantly reducing

under two years, realized through annual savings of

response time.

JPY 140M. Additionally, the insurer aims to increase

The Case Study of Fukoku Mutual Life (Exhibit 1) serves to
illustrate how insurers can reap these benefits from the ap-

customer satisfaction scores through reduced lead
time of pay-outs.

plication of AI in claims processing.

Figure 12: Selected case studies of AI-enabled
claims automation

Basler Versicherungen
use AI to automate parts of their glass damage claims processing including payment transactions.

Zurich UK
have launched a pilot AI application to automate their injury
claims processing.

UNDERLYING

USE

CASE:

“Derive and calculate pay-outs based on company
data (historic claims files, contracts) and third party
data (medical certificates and hospital bills) in order
to achieve accurate and efficient claims processing
and fast pay-outs.”

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 33

Customer efficacy
Other currently popular AI applications for efficacy gains include
customer self-service solutions like biometrics authorizations
and even more prominently chatbots – as a variety of existing
insurance case studies demonstrate (Figure 13).

EXHIBIT

According to Gartner, by 2019, 40% of enterprises will be using

As early as 2010, American insurer Aetna introduced

chatbots to facilitate business processes using natural-language

their virtual assistant “Ann” to improve their customer

interactions. The advantages of chatbots include standardized

efficacy. Ann was developed by NextIT and primarily

and consistent quality of service, 24-hour service for customers

intended to act as a welcome guide on Aetna’s website,

as well as reduced costs. Beyond business-to-customer applica-

engaging customers and answering login and registra-

tions, chatbots are increasingly being implemented in the insur-

tion questions. Today, Ann helps customers find a

ance industry for internal usage to automate processes in HR,

doctor, estimate the cost of services, answer questions

IT, and operations, or to assist knowledge workers in accessing

about claims, ID cards and more. She answers around

expertise in real-time.

20,000 questions daily and can provide responses in

27

The case study of Aetna (Exhibit 2) gives detailed insights into
how a chatbot can be set up and trained in order to deliver such
efficacy gains.

2:

AETNA

written or spoken form, although questions can only
be asked via text. Aetna has installed a member of
staff who can check Ann’s answers and enrich them
whenever necessary. If Ann does not know the correct answer, she directs the customer to a dedicated

Figure 13: Selected case studies of AI-enabled
customer self-service solutions

customer service agent. The bot has started off with
achieving high quality responses only 35% of the time
but has quickly improved to 80% within a year. Ann

EXTERNAL

CUSTOMER-FACING

has enabled customers to resolve issues directly via

APPLICATIONS

the website, without having to call an agent and wait-

Axa

ing in line during specific hours.

have introduced a chatbot on their Health App “Xtra”, which
advises users on fitness and nutrition tracks, and answers
questions regarding health goals.

Manulife

UNDERLYING

have introduced a biometrics authorization application that is
able to identify users based on their unique voice profile.

PNB MetLife
have introduced a medical chatbot on Facebook Messenger
that informs users of cancer and heart disease risks and

USE

CASE:

“Answer customer questions based on company
data (user profiles, product info, doctor database)
and customer data (text-based customer question
sets) in order to provide timely, personal, and helpful
customer service.”

simplifies medical information on these. It can also calculate a
user’s health quotient by asking the customer questions.
A review of the current AI landscape reveals that the majority

INTERNAL

CUSTOMER-FACING

APPLICATIONS

Versicherungskammer Bayern
leverage AI in order to increase the effectiveness of
their customer service by letting Watson sort and classify
customer emails.

Anthem
use IBM Watson to assist doctors with creation of
treatment plans.

of prominent use cases realized by traditional insurers today,
are focused on achieving efficacy gains and that these efforts
are already yielding tangible benefits.
To keep up with the industry, insurers must continually strive
to implement and improve their AI efficacy endeavors. Applying the Use Case Formula to analyze the successful AI initiatives of their competitors enables insurers to abstract generic
AI use cases that can be replicated and serve as a starting
point for newcomers in the AI space.

34 |

6.2 The future of insurance – insurers have yet to leverage AI
for discovery
Large scale AI applications in the area of operations and customer discovery are still rare in the insurance industry today.

Case studies of consumer-led companies leading in the application of AI outside the insurance industry serve as an indicator of what is already technologically feasible today. Analyzing
their case studies to identify underlying AI use cases can
serve as valuable starting point for ideation by transferring
the identified use case into the insurance context.

Leveraging AI to generate new insights in the form of previ-

Operations discovery

ously unknown answers or actions is simply more difficult

In operations discovery, AI can unlock value through novel

to realize from a technological point of view and requires a

insights that lead to cost reductions. In this realm one capabil-

greater amount of creativity.

ity stands out as a key differentiating competitive advantage

However, a few cross-industry players such as Google, as
well as innovative InsurTech start-ups, such as Lemonade or
Oscar, have already started invading this area to seize value.
For example, Oscar, a health insurance and tech company,
is using claims data to make inferences about which doctor
performs which procedure at what frequency – enabling them
to discover narrow specialty areas and consequently refer
patients deliberately to the right specialist.

for insurance businesses in the future: fast and cost-effective
product innovation and design. In the era of rapidly evolving
customer needs and rising product personalization, insurance
businesses are struggling more than ever to keep pace with
customer demand in a cost-efficient manner. Reductions in
lead times and product costs will hence become even more
crucial in the digitalized future.
While the application of AI in this realm is still mostly un-

Oscar and other new market entrants are changing the
rules of the game with customer-centric design, exceptional
engagement, and cost-effective operations. Although revolutionary in the insurance industry, their business models are

tapped in the insurance industry, the case study of Stanley
Black & Decker (Exhibit 3) serves as an illustrative benchmark
for leading edge insurance companies who may begin to
leverage generative AI solutions for product design.

often inspired by consumer business innovations. As a result,
insurers who want to lead in their industry beyond the current status, must turn to consumer businesses as a source of
inspiration.

JEFF

KOWALSKI

|

CTO

AT

AUTODESK

Generative design is a departure
from the way that we have traditionally done design, but these technologies are not a threat, they’re more
like superpowers.

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 35

The case study of Stanley Black & Decker demonstrates that
AI technology is ready to unlock opportunities for shortened
product creation lead times as well as costs and thereby to
gain significant bottom and top-line line effects. Although the

EXHIBIT 3: STANLEY
BLACK & DECKER
Early in 2017, Stanley Black & Decker, a company
producing tools for industry and household purposes,
released a statement that they have been working
on opportunities to leverage AI in product design to
decrease time spent on development, thereby yielding
operations discovery. An AI-powered algorithm helped
Stanley Black & Decker’s employees to redesign a tool
for electricians for fixing electrical and telephone lines.

tools manufacturing industry has little in common with the
insurance industry, the application of the Use Case Formula
can help to transfer Stanley Black & Decker’s successful AI endeavor into the insurance context. Similarly to Stanley Black
& Decker, insurers can datafy their product development
process in order to automate product design. With access to
diverse data sources as well as a set of pre-defined product
requirements, AI can design the optimal product for any
target group or even individual customer – at no incremental
cost.

Previous tools had been almost 7 kg, which made
them too heavy for workers. The company used an AI
enhanced generative design software from Autodesk,
which designs new products via mimicking nature’s
evolutionary approach. The algorithm explores all possible product combinations, which can be thousands
or millions of design choices to find the best one,
matching a set of user requirements such as light
weight. The AI learns throughout the process which
combinations work best and eventually comes up with
the most effective and efficient design. The human
designer can then adapt the choice if needed. Generative design may even go beyond human capabilities of
design creation and therefore not only increase speed
and reduce the cost of product development but may
also have a positive impact on product quality and
desirability.

UNDERLYING

USE

CASE:

“Create new products based on company data (previous product components, product requirements,
employee feedback data) in order to deliver innovative products to the market faster and at lower cost.“

Potential insurance use case:
“Design new insurance policies based on company data (e.g.,
previous policies, customer feedback, claims data), public data
(e.g., forums, Google search data, demographics statistics)
and customer data (e.g., smart home, wearables, phone usage) in order to deliver more diverse and tailored insurance
products to the market faster and at lower cost.“

36 |

Customer discovery

While customer discovery applications of AI are still rare

Within the realm of customer discovery, AI can deliver value

in the insurance industry, the case study of Under Armour

by unlocking revenues through previously unknown insights.

(Exhibit 4) illustrates not only the technological feasibility of

This may be the most game-changing area for insurers to lev-

such applications, but also serves as a benchmark for insur-

erage AI in the future: The rise of self-driving cars, the sharing

ance companies who aim to progress to sustainable business

economy, social brokering, and comparison platforms are just

models.

some of the threats to their traditional profit models insurers
are facing. It is therefore undisputed that insurers will have to
identify and unlock new revenue streams and AI may be the
needed enabler for redefining the business.

SUNDAR

PICHAI

|

CEO

AT

GOOGLE

We’ve been building these incredible capabilities, be it search, the knowledge graph, our understanding of natural language, image recognition, voice recognition, translation. Particularly
over the last three years, we have felt that with
Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence,
we can do these things better than ever before.

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 37

Under Armour’s case study powerfully demonstrates how
AI can open up opportunities for completely new, profitable
business models centered on data and user interactions –
even for a business with its origin in the sports fashion manu-

EXHIBIT

4:

UNDER

ARMOUR

In a transition from its traditional fashion manufacturing business model towards a data-driven
business model, Under Armour has partnered with
IBM to develop “UA Record” - a cognitive coach
that serves as a personal health consultant, fitness
trainer and assistant by providing users with timely,
evidence-based advice regarding nutrition, activity
and sleep. Under Armour has developed a range of
wearable devices, including a fitness tracker, heart
rate monitor chest strap, and smart scales that
gather user behavior and health data. The coaching
is based on a comparative model, clustering users
based on criteria such as age, gender, and activity

facturing industry. Applying the Use Case Formula to the case
study of Under Armour, the underlying use case can be used
to transfer this data-driven business model into the context of
insurance. Like Under Armour, insurers can leverage diverse
data pools to help customers reduce health risks. However,
insurers can go one step further by leveraging AI to prevent yet unknown risks in all areas of life: Health, transport,
household, finances and more. Insurers will then no longer be
confined to reimbursing materialized risk but instead prevent
loss events from occurring in the first place. To become an
effective and trusted assistant in preventing personal loss
events for the customer, the insurer needs to build a much
closer relationship – for which the use of AI for meaningful
analysis of big data will be the enabler.

level in order to provide relevant recommendations
for users. The model will, over time, be able to tap
into additional data pools to derive novel connections between e.g., weather and training behavior.
UA Record not only serves to strengthen customer
relationships and build emotional connections but is
also able to collect relevant data from customers to
cater to needs more efficiently in the future.

Potential insurance use case:
“Suggest risk prevention measures based on company
internal data (e.g., customer profiles, claims files), public data
(e.g., demographic statistics, geographical statistics, financial
data), customer data (e.g., location tracking, wearables data,
pictures) and third party data (e.g., Facebook, Instagram) in
order to increase customer safety.”

A review of applications of AI in insurance reveals that little

UNDERLYING

USE

CASE:

“Recommend sport activities and sleep behavior
based on company internal data (customer profile, product usage data), customer data (nutrition
info) and public data (weather) in order to increase
customer health and determine future needs more
effectively.”

tangible and meaningful impact is yet created with generative
solutions in the realm of operations or customer discovery.
However, selected case studies from consumer-led companies serve to demonstrate that the technological feasibility is
already given today. To innovate and lead in their industry,
insurers can turn to state of the art examples in other industries as a source of inspiration – the Use Case Formula can
help in this endeavor by distilling the most relevant use case
characteristics to ideate analog insurance use cases.

38 |

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 39

7.
Act now
Change is here. It is evident that AI has already begun to create a tangible impact in
insurance. Looking beyond the insurance industry, however, offers a glimpse into the real
magnitude of the AI-enabled disruption still to come. AI technology holds the potential to
fundamentally redefine the industry on all levels – challenging traditional cost structures,
enabling novel relationships with end-customers and much more.
For those who are yet to embark on their journey towards an artificially intelligent future,
the time to act is now. For leaders looking to steer their organizational ships into the
auspicious waters of AI, the following three principles provide guidance:
1. Data is the key: Before getting started with any AI use case, it is crucial to determine
the type, quantity, and quality of data at hand. This will provide you with an initial
idea for feasible and relevant use cases to pursue. But don’t throw in the towel if your
business doesn’t have access to the data required to follow through with the use cases
you envisioned. Consider accessing public data sources or partnering with a business
that has the data you are looking for. Alternatively, you can develop a strategy to start
gathering valuable data, e.g., by “datafying” previously analog processes or developing
a consumer-facing digital product that serves as a “vehicle” to gather user data.
2. Start small: There is no need to go overboard and start selecting the most complex
use cases in an attempt to gain as much value as possible. By starting small you can
release an application faster and then build on it over time. AI applications can be
iteratively extended to scale, so companies can expand their capabilities and capture
increasing value over time.
3. Don’t be afraid of failure: AI projects can be particularly challenging in that they need
to tackle the social stigmatization of the technology, require interdisciplinary collaboration and bear high cost and time investments. In order to succeed, it is crucial to accept
failure as an integral part of innovation that contributes to organizational learning.
Only by adopting a “fail fast, fail early” mindset, can time and cost investments be kept
in check.

What steam power has been to industrial manufacturing, Artificial Intelligence will be to insurance. Ask
yourself this question: What would have happened
to your manufacturing business after 1800 if you had
never used steam? True innovators are those who
look into the future and act before it arrives!

40 |

Our team

Nikolay Kolev

Jost Geimer

Marc Stiller

Partner, Deloitte Digital

Senior Manager, Deloitte Digital

Senior Consultant, Deloitte Digital

nkolev@deloitte.de

jgeimer@deloitte.de

mstiller@deloitte.de

+49 89 29036 7896

+49 89 29036 7672

+49 89 29036 7609

Esther Daweke

Luisa Butzmann

Consultant, Deloitte Digital

Business Analyst, Deloitte Digital

edaweke@deloitte.de

lbutzmann@deloitte.de

+49 89 29036 7875

+49 89 29036 6993

Contributors
Sascha Bauer

Fabrice Wegner

Thomas Viehmann

Senior Manager,

Manager,

Senior Manager,

Big Data and Machine Learning expert

Product Development and InsurTech expert

Machine Learning expert

sasbauer@deloitte.de

fwegner@deloitte.de

tviehmann@deloitte.de

Deloitte Insurance Tech Community
InsTechGermany@deloitte.de

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 41

Subject Matter Experts

Dr. Christian Schareck

Nicolai Andersen

Dr. Kurt Mitzner

Partner, Industry Leader Insurance

Partner, Head of Innovation EMEA

Partner, Strategy Insurance Sector

cschareck@deloitte.de

nicandersen@deloitte.de

kmitzner@deloitte.de

Jens Parthe

Dr. Björn Bringmann

Partner, Strategy Financial Services

Director, Head of Data Science

jparthe@deloitte.de

bbringmann@deloitte.de

42 |

Sources
18. Tim Urban, Wait but Why (2015): The AI Revolution: The Road to
Superintelligence; URL: https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/01/artificialintelligence-revolution-1.html

1.

CB Insights (2017): The State of Artificial Intelligence; URL: https://
www.cbinsights.com/research/report/artificial-intelligence-trends/

2.

CB Insights (2017): The State of Artificial Intelligence; URL: https://
www.cbinsights.com/research/report/artificial-intelligence-trends/

3.

IDC (2017): Worldwide Semiannual Cognitive/Artificial Intelligence
Systems Spending Guide

4.

DeepMind (2016): DeepMind AI Reduces Google Data Centre
Cooling Bill by 40%; URL: https://deepmind.com/blog/deepmind-aireduces-google-data-centre-cooling-bill-40/

5.

U.S. Department of Transportation (2016): ODI RESUME ; URL:
https://static.nhtsa.gov/odi/inv/2016/INCLA-PE16007-7876.PDF

21. Yaniv Taigman, Ming Yang, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Lior Wolf (2014):
DeepFace: Closing the Gap to Human-Level Performance in Face
Verification

6.

eMarketer (2017): Alexa, Say What?! Voice-Enabled Speaker Usage
to Grow Nearly 130% This Year; URL: https://www.emarketer.com/
Article/Alexa-Say-What-Voice-Enabled-Speaker-Usage-Grow-Nearly130-This-Year/1015812?ecid=NL1001

22. Capital One (2016): Bank on Alexa with Capital One’s Expanding
Skill for Managing Your Money; URL: https://www.capitalone.com/
onefocus/bank-alexa/

7.

Gartner (2016): Gartner Predicts 2017

8.

O’Reilly (2017): The New Artificial Intelligence Market

9.

IBM Institute for Business Value (2016): Understanding customers
and risk

10. IBM Institute for Business Value (2016): Understanding customers
and risk
11. IBM Institute for Business Value (2016): Understanding customers
and risk
12. IBM (2017): 10 Key Marketing Trends for 2017
13. Deloitte UK (2015): Insurance disrupted
14. Deloitte (2017): EMEA Insurance data analytics study
15. Wired (2016): Google’s AI wins fifth and final game against Go genius
Lee Sedol; URL: https://www.wired.com/2016/03/googles-ai-winsfifth-final-game-go-genius-lee-sedol/
16. Tim Urban, Wait but Why (2015): The AI Revolution: The Road to
Superintelligence; URL: https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/01/artificialintelligence-revolution-1.html
17. Wired (2016): Google’s AI wins fifth and final game against Go genius
Lee Sedol; URL: https://www.wired.com/2016/03/googles-ai-winsfifth-final-game-go-genius-lee-sedol/

19. Google (2012): Using large-scale brain simulations for machine
learning and A.I.; URL: https://www.blog.google/topics/machinelearning/using-large-scale-brain-simulations-for/
20. Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, Trevor Darrell, Cornell
University (2017): Curiosity-driven Exploration by Self-supervised
Prediction

23. Forrester, TechRadar (2017): AI Technologies Q1
24. Forbes (2011): Google’s “Infrigenovation” Secrets; URL: https://www.
forbes.com/sites/scottcleland/2011/10/03/googles-infringenovationsecrets/
25. IBM (2016): The biggest data challenges that you might not even
know you have; URL: https://www.ibm.com/blogs/watson/2016/05/
biggest-data-challenges-might-not-even-know/
26. Techcrunch (2016): Facebook chose to fight fake news with AI,
not just user reports; URL: https://techcrunch.com/2016/11/14/
facebook-fake-news/
27. O’Reilly (2017): The new data-driven Artificial Intelligence Market
28. Gartner (2017): Four Use Cases for Chatbots in the Enterprise…Now

From mystery to mastery: Unlocking the business value of Artificial Intelligence in the insurance industry | 43

This communication contains general information only not
suitable for addressing the particular circumstances of any
individual case and is not intended to be used as a basis for
commercial decisions or decisions of any other kind. None of
Deloitte Digital GmbH or Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, its
member firms, or their related entities (collectively, the “Deloitte
network”) is, by means of this communication, rendering
professional advice or services. No entity in the Deloitte
network shall be responsible for any loss whatsoever sustained
by any person who relies on this communication.
Deloitte refers to one or more of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu
Limited, a UK private company limited by guarantee (“DTTL”), its
network of member firms, and their related entities. DTTL and
each of its member firms are legally separate and independent
entities. DTTL (also referred to as “Deloitte Global”) does not
provide services to clients. Please see www.deloitte.com/de/
UeberUns for a more detailed description of DTTL and its
member firms.
Deloitte provides audit, risk advisory, tax, financial advisory
and consulting services to public and private clients spanning
multiple industries; legal advisory services in Germany are
provided by Deloitte Legal. With a globally connected network
of member firms in more than 150 countries, Deloitte brings
world-class capabilities and high-quality service to clients,
delivering the insights they need to address their most
complex business challenges. Deloitte’s approximately 263,900
professionals are committed to making an impact that matters.
Issue 11/2017

