No 1 /2020

Data-driven insurance:
ready for the next frontier?

01 Executive summary
02	The battle for customer
touchpoints
15 The digital insurer
23	Marketing, distribution
and servicing
28	Product development
and underwriting
38 Claims management
43 Outlook
47 Conclusion

Executive summary
Digital technology will direct change
across the insurance value chain.

The rapid spread of internet-enabled devices and universal connectivity has
changed consumer behaviours and expectations across all industries, particularly
among the younger generations. The digital age has also brought an explosion of
heterogeneous data from different sources and platforms, which providers of risk
protection solutions can use to broaden the reach and boundaries of insurability. As
their value chain becomes more digitally connected, insurers will be able to better
understand customer segments and partners and adapt in near real-time.

Insurers will become hyper-aware of
customer needs and preferences...

In the short-term the digital insurance consumers will likely be young, educated and
with higher levels of income. Over time, innovative digital cover options for all
consumers will become increasingly available, making income and education less
relevant factors in purchasing decisions. With advanced analytics capabilities, the
insurer of the future will be very aware of customer needs and preferences, and
provide personalised and real-time service, with flexible product offerings. Artificial
intelligence (AI) will be used to interact and build understanding of the customer,
and servicing will be through (personal) virtual assistance, 24/7.

...and to meet customer expectations,
they will need to adapt to provide
coverage across life-cycle stages.

Insurers will be able to move away from a product-focused sales approach to a one
closely tied to the broader needs across the life time of a customer, with greater
focus on the human experience. New generations of systems will deliver
unprecedented levels of proximity and influence on customers, and insurers will go
beyond mere channel management to optimising interaction across a diverse range
of customer touchpoints. This will have implications for business models, how
insurers interact with their customers, and the nature of the services they provide.

Digitalisation will also help create new
underwriting and portfolio risk
management techniques.

Over time, Big Data and sophisticated models will allow risk pricing at increasingly
granular level. Emergence of new risks will create new underwriting and portfolio
risk management techniques. Insurers will create early-warning systems to gather
practical insights that prevent incidents to simplify and accelerate claims processing.
Data-enabled processes will minimise friction and streamline the customer
insurance journey, from request for coverage to claim. Digitalisation will thus help
improve the customer experience and also the efficacy of back office processes.

At the same time, using data from
multiple providers could drive new
business models...

Further, digitalisation will enable development of new data-driven business models
impacting the entire insurance value chain. Access to data and the capability to
model risks will be key. True leverage will come from utilising other assets, such as
key data supplier partners, entry points to ecosystems, and the know how to
generate customer insights. Insurers will need to decide whether to be suppliers of
coverage, or to collaborate with and/or own new areas of business operation.

...and value propositions in insurance.

Technology could foster just ongoing incremental industry change by broadening
the scope and affordability of insurance. Alternatively, potential for more radical
transformation in the provision of risk protection services to households and
businesses is up for grabs if some typical hurdles to innovation can be overcome.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 1

The battle for customer touchpoints
Digital customers expect different levels of service. What is second nature to digital natives presents a new world of
opportunity for incumbent insurers still operating paper systems. Combining digital solutions with advanced analytics
will deliver new insights, allowing insurers to provide deep, holistic engagement across customer lifetimes.

Digital interaction: it’s life
Digital technology has already
transformed many industries…

Digital interaction has become a norm of daily life. Across the world, of the
approximately 4 billion people connected online, more than 90% use mobile devices
and spend several hours in the virtual world each day.1 New technologies and digital
facilities are being developed for consumers, including, for example, location and
other sensor-based services (for smart homes, cars and factories). Developments in
cognitive systems and artificial intelligence (AI) are also creating innovation
opportunities (see Figure 1), including for insurers.

Figure 1
New technologies impacting insurance
Impact on business
Revolutionary

High

Medium

● Digital business
technology platforms
● IoT platforms
● Digital experience
platforms

● Intelligent process
automation

● Next generation
personal health
records (PHR)

● Conversational
platforms
● Behavioural analytics
● Electronic health
Record data extraction
● Genomics and
epigenetics
● Administration/
management SaaS

● Digitally-engineered
underwriting
● Autonomous vehicles

● Digital advisors
● Advanced analytics
solutions

● Insurance wallets
● Reward and loyalty
platforms

0 to 2 years

● P&C related technologies
● L&H related technologies

● Full life-cycle
API management

2 to 5 years

● Sensing & analytics related technologies
● Customer interaction related technologies

5 to 10 years

10+ years
Time to impact

● Productivity related technologies
● Customer loyalty/wallet related technologies

Source: Swiss Re Institute, adapted from Gartner’s Hype Cycle for Digital and P&C Insurance, 2019

1

2

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Connected Commerce: Connectivity is Enabling Lifestyle Evolution, Nielsen,19 November 2018.

New technologies are impacting engagement and insight generation
… and will change how insurers
acquire and service customers.

Figure 2
Forecast growth of digital data

The rapid spread of internet-enabled wearable devices and ubiquitous connectivity
are enabling new ways of communication and information sharing. This has led to
exponential growth in the volume of digital data being generated automatically,
cheaply and non-intrusively. International Data Corp estimates that there will be 41.6
billion IoT devices around the world by 2025, each generating data (see Figure 2).2
New tools to analyse the data and extract useful insights are also proliferating, and
will change the way insurers interact with consumers.

200
CAGR (2019–25)
Real-time data 39%
Non-real time data:24%

150

100

50

0
2010

2012

2014

Real time (zettabytes)

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

Non real time (zettabytes)

Source: IDC, Swiss Re Institute

The task facing insurers is to upgrade
the online experience for their
customers.

Consumer preferences and buying behaviours are also changing rapidly, and many
industries have adopted more customer-centric business models. Insurers will have
to work hard to keep customers loyal. A recent survey found that while insurers
remain the most trusted source for new risk coverage solutions, consumers are
switching carriers more often than they used to, and are more open to new entrants,
including from InsurTech and Big Tech.3

2
3

The Growth in Connected IoT Devices Is Expected to Generate 79.4ZB of Data in 2025, International
Data Corporation, 18 June 2019.
Insurers: How to Lead in the New Era of Connectivity, Bain and Company, 26 September 2019.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 3

The battle for customer touchpoints

Digital insights into life events, new insurance opportunities
Insights from data analytics can boost
customer retention...

Figure 3 shows the cycles of customer acquisition, and also what is involved in
customer retention. Digitalisation can support these cycles by capturing insights
from the end-to-end consumer experience.

Figure 3
Customer acquisition and
loyalty lifecycle

Prospect customer experience
Finding “good” customers

Existing customer experience
Maximising customer life time value

Advise

Advise
Purchase

Purchase/
use

Evaluation

e

ienc

Trigger
ie, service use

Ba
expde
r

Trigger
ie, life event

ive
sit ce
Po rien
pe
ex

Consideration

Decision
ie, upselling, service
use, etc
N
ex ega
pe tiv
rie e
nc
e

Decision
buy/not buy

Evaluation

Research

Exit

Consideration

Research

Customer acquisition cycle

Customer servicing cycle

Evaluating other offers –
competitors have to put very
little effort to gain attention

Continuous engagement –
Customer pays very little attention
to competitors offerings. Improves
customer life time value

Source: Swiss Re Institute

... by triggering actions that enable
new sales or servicing opportunities.

4

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Sources of digital data can also provide information on what has changed in a
customer’s life (eg, family, location or job change, see Figure 4). This helps insurers
better understand life events, knowledge they can use to develop personalised
marketing strategies and guidance on next best actions (both predictive and
prescriptive) for individual customers. This can entail cross-selling of other risk
mitigation and value-added services, in addition to traditional insurance cover.

Figure 4
Access to life events enabled by digital interactions
4) Predictive: The aim of
predictive analytics is to detect
problems before they occur.

Data
sources

5) Prescriptive: Prescriptive
analytics takes predictive analytics
one step further by offering specific
and actionable next steps on how
to solve the issues brought up in
the predictive data analysis.1

3) Identify and communicate
the next best action

6) Customer online interaction
2) Social media
interaction

Insurance event trigger

Insurance Prevention Value add
4)
Life event trigger

Familyrelated events

Life
related events

Education/jobrelated events

Free timerelated events

Mobilityrelated events
1

Love
Marriage
Pregnancy
1. Kid

2.Kid
Kids leaving
Separation
Death

First apartment
Same apartment
Relocation

Emigration
House purchase
House sale

Education
Re-skilling
(post graduate)
Job change

Self-employment
Workload
eduction
Retirement

Hobbies/interest
Travel
Media &
entertainment

Food/nutrition
Culture
Commerce

On-demand
mobility
Daily commute
Ride hailing

Car/bike/
purchase/sale
Business travel
On-demand
micromobility

1) Pregnancy
6)

5)

Source: https://www.proponent.com/predictive-analytics-vs-prescriptive-analytics/

Source: Swiss Re Institute

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 5

The battle for customer touchpoints

New actors, not insurers, own many
touchpoints.

However, these digital signals are not embedded in the environments that insurers
naturally access, not least because insurance is a low-touch business. For example, it
has been estimated that buyers of insurance in the US average just 2.7 information
interactions with their provider per year.4 Data on consumer actions is more readily
available from other agencies. For instance, data on mobility behaviour is owned by
mobility companies, not insurers. And operators of smart-home digital platforms
know more about insurers’ customers properties than insurers do. The more urban
the area of operation, the greater the likelihood that insights are generated by noninsurers. What insurers need to do is embed themselves as providers of risk
protection within the broader ecosystems of digital touch points with consumers.

Optimising interaction across multiple touchpoints
Insurers need to access both owned
and not-owned touchpoints.

To achieve this, insurers need to optimise their interaction with customers across
multiple providers and lifestyle areas like health, education, mobility and leisure. In a
single journey, customers switch touchpoints to fulfil various information needs.
Insurers need to access insights across the different types of touchpoints, both
owned and not owned (paid, earned and social, see arrows in Figure 5). Topperforming insurers will operate across touchpoints as a unified customer-facing
brand, with consistent messaging and experience to provoke recall.

Figure 5
Dynamic and personalised protection enabled by digital-touchpoint insights and digitally-augmented assistants

Sensors and data sources
Customer journey

Context & relevance

Customer lifestyle

Digital augmented
interface

Health

Lifestyle clusters

Education/working

Digital augmented
assistant

Living

Dynamic, personalised,
and augmented
protection

Free time
Consumers touchpoints:
Owned

Mobility
Risk, asset & liability
management

Consumers touchpoints:
Not owned (paid,
earned, social)

Source: Swiss Re Institute
4

6

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Customers Know What They Want. Are Insurers Listening? Bain and Company, 10 October 2018.

̤̤ Owned touchpoints: The insurer invests and controls these consumer
touchpoints. They include agents, websites, apps. The goal is long-term
relationship building; the benefits are cost efficiency and control.
̤̤ Paid touchpoints: The insurer pays for the digital touchpoint to reach the
customer, such as through paid searches and sponsorships. Paid touchpoints can
include various channels like bancassurance and agents.
̤̤ Earned touchpoints: Here the customer becomes the touchpoint. This is when
satisfied customers become social media influencers, and spread awareness.
̤̤ Social touchpoints: An insurer interacts via third party channels but uses its own
profile, such as on Facebook or Twitter. Social media is forecast to be the fastestgrowing digital advertising channel globally over the next five years.5

The changing nature of insurance touchpoints
With the growth of multiple touchpoints, industry susceptibility to disruption is rising
(see Figure 6). We expect insurer interactions will – necessarily – increasingly begin
to cross conventional boundaries. Big Tech and digital ecosystems (eg, Grab, GoJek,
ecommerce marketplaces) are changing the touchpoints in the insurance context.
For example, in the UK four of the leading insurance providers are retailers selling
“white-label” insurance.6 Some insurers will orchestrate digital and physical
ecosystems by combining, in one offer, services that are normally delivered by
different providers.
Figure 6
Speed of disruption across sectors: insurance to be more disrupted and volatile
Current level of disruption vs. susceptibility to future disruption
18 industry sectors

Current level of disruption
0–1 scale

Viability

Volatility
More disrupted

Comms & media
Infrastructure & transposrtation
services

Retail

Insurance

CG & S

High-tech
Software & platform

Banking
Life sciences

Travel
Automotive
Energy Utilities
Capital markets
Health

Chemicals

Natural resources
Industrial equipment & machinery

Less disrupted
Durability

Vulnerability

Less susceptible

Susceptibility to future disruption
0–1 scale
Less susceptible yet more disrupted

More susceptible
Less susceptible and less disrupted

Source: V. Savic and B. Moussavi, Good things come to those who don’t wait, Accenture, 2019, Swiss Re Institute

5
6

Social Will Be The Fastest-Growing Digital Advertising Channel Globally, Forrester, 15 August 2019.
Bain and Company, 10 October 2018, op. cit.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 7

The battle for customer touchpoints

Front-runners are set to outperform.

An early-mover strategy into new technology could prove expensive in the medium
term, but deliver strong returns over the longer run. A BCG MIT survey found that
65% of executives across industries do not yet see value from AI investments made
in recent years.7 Activities like collecting and curating data, building a knowledge
base that is specific to the company, training systems, getting employees to
augment them and developing strong governance, takes years. These are rarely outof-the-box solutions that can be rapidly implemented. Figure 7 demonstrates one
future pay-back scenario: companies that invest early will burn cash for a few years,
but then begin to rapidly see benefits of accumulated learning and investments.
Those players adopting the “fast follower” strategy that has worked with other
technologies, could find themselves long-term laggards.8

Figure 7
Relative changes in cash flow by AI adoption cohort
140% % change per cohort, cumulative
120%

Front-runners
(absorb within 5–7 years)

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%

Followers
(absorb by 2030)

0%
–20%
–40%
2017

2020

2025

2030

Laggards
(do not absorb by 2030)

Source: Jacques Bughin et al., Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy, McKinsey Global Institute,
2018, and Swiss Re Institute

7

8

8

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

MIT Sloan Management Review and Boston Consulting Group surveyed ~2,500 executives, See
Winning With AI: Pioneers Combine Strategy, Organizational Behavior, and Technology, MIT Sloan
Management Review, October 2019.
V. Mahidhar,T. H. Davenport, Why Companies That Wait to Adopt AI May Never Catch Up, Harvard
Business Review, 6 December 2018.

The digital consumer – today and the future
Millennials are the typical digital
insurance consumers of today.

Based on a sample from three key markets where digital insurance is making
headway– the US, Sweden and China – today’s digital consumers are typically
between 20 and 36 years old, affluent and educated.9,10,11,12,13 The digital generation
(Generation Y (born between the early 1980s and late 1990s) and subsequent ones)
expect rapid access to information, and clarity around the value proposition.
Proactive servicing is key to maintaining loyalty and to maximise customer lifetime
value among these clients.

Most have above-average incomes
and education levels.

Higher-income consumers can afford insurance. There is room for growth in lowerincome segments, but value propositions need to be adapted. In the sample markets,
younger consumers with higher incomes and education tend to make more online
purchases than those with low- and mid-level incomes, at least in China and the US.
In China, 44% of consumers with incomes in excess of RMB 20 000 use online tools
to buy health insurance (including medical expenditure and critical illness). Only 30%
of low-income consumers (< RMB 5 000) do so (see Figure 8). Along similar lines,
45% of consumers with doctorate degrees buy health insurance digitally compared
with 34% with technical/vocational training.14 The same can be seen in the US. For
example, the median income of consumers buying insurance from Haven Life is USD
80 000, and more than 80% have (at least) a college degree.15

Figure 8
Digital purchases of health insurance products across income and education levels in China, 2018
Income level
50%

Education level

% of consumers using digital purchase methods

40%
30%

50%

% of consumers using digital purchase methods

44%

41%

40%

40%

44%

45%

Master
degree

Doctorate/
professional
degree

34%

30%

30%

20%

20%

10%

10%

0%

0%
Low income
(<RMB 5 000)

Mid income
(RMB 5 001 – 20 000)

High income
(>RMB 20 000)

Technical/
vocational
training

Bachelor/
associate
degree

Source: Swiss Re Institute

9
10
11
12
13
14
15

At Avanza, a Swedish digital life insurer; most customers were between 20 to 30 years old. See
Annual Report 2016 – Sweden’s most satisfied savings customers 7 years in a row”, Avanza, 2016.
In China, the majority who signed up for Alipay’s digital critical illness product were born
post- 1990. See Online Insurance in China, General Reinsurance AG, 2017.
The majority of Haven Life customers are millennials (21 to 36). See Happy Birthday to us, Haven Life,
16 May 2018.
81% of customers at US insurer Lemonade are between 24 to 44. See S. Wininger, “Lemonade’s First
Quarter in Market”, lemonade.com, 18 January 2017.
The majority at ZhongAn, a digital P&C insurer in China, are aged 18 to 39. What can insurers learn
from insurtech giant Zhong An, Accenture, 15 January 2019.
Chinese non-life personal lines: consumer perspectives, Swiss Re Institute, 2019.
Haven Life, 16 May 2018, op. cit.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 9

The battle for customer touchpoints

Why do differences in online buying behaviour exist across markets?
The internet is the most used medium to research L&H insurance in China (59%)16
and Sweden (68%).17 However, the penetration of online insurance purchases is still
uneven in some countries. For example, online L&H insurance distribution accounts
for less than 8% in the US18,19 and China20 but already above 30% in Sweden.21 The
findings are similar for P&C insurance. In both Sweden and China, around 10% of
P&C premiums written were distributed online in 2016. 22, 23 In other markets, levels
of digital insurance purchases are much lower despite the internet being used by
many as a research tool. For example, in Spain, 52% use the internet to research L&H
insurance,24 but online penetration of life insurance is only around 0.02%,25 and only
2%26 of P&C premiums came from online channels in 2015 (see Figure 9). For some
commoditised lines such as motor, online purchases are higher: 25% of consumers
in the US,27 11% of consumers in China28 and 5% of consumers in Spain29 purchased
their motor insurance online in 2015/2016.

Many use the internet to research
insurance but penetration of online
purchases is low.

Figure 9
Online insurance purchases
Online distribution of life insurance in 2017
35%
30%

P&C online distribution in 2015/2016

% online distribution of annual
life insurance premiums written

12%

Online distribution of premiums written in %

32.4%

10%

25%

10%

10%

8%

20%

6%

15%

4%

10%
5%

<7.6%

6.5%

US

China

>1%

0%
Sweden

2.2%

2%

Spain

0%
Sweden

China

Spain

Source: Verdict, 2015; China Statistic Press, 2018; GenRe, 2017; Axco, 2019; Statista, 2019, Swiss Re Institute

16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

10

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Chinese non-life personal lines: Consumer perspectives, Swiss Re Institute, 2019.
European Insurance Report, Swiss Re, 2015.
Online distribution includes life, health and accident insurance.
United States Special InsurTech: Online Distribution, Statista, 2019.
Insurance in China, forty years of reform and opening, China Statistics Press, 2018.
Sweden Distribution Channels Life, axco.co.uk
Sweden Distribution Channels Non-life, axco.co.uk
“How Tencent and Ant Financial are rushing into China’s insurance industry”, cbinsights.com,
23 October 2017.
European Insurance Report, Swiss Re, 2015.
Spain Distribution Channels Life, axco.co.uk
Spain Distribution Channels Non-life, axco.co.uk
US Insurance Shopping Study, J.D. Power, 2016.
sigma 3/2017 – World insurance in 2016: The China growth engine steams ahead, Swiss Re Institute.
Ibid.

One reason is that availability of online
purchase tools is limited.

One reason for the low penetration of online life cover could be that many insurers do
not offer the tools to buy online. Looking at provider websites, we found that in
Spain, neither the biggest insurers nor InsurTechs sell life insurance online directly to
consumers. Similarly, in China and the US, very few large insurers sell life insurance
policies digitally.30, 31 However, in Sweden, six of the biggest financial institutions do
so, which could explain the higher purchase penetration there (32%). 32

Online purchases are higher in markets
with low power concentration,
high individualism, low uncertainty
avoidance…

Nevertheless, equal access to online purchasing facilities may not necessarily lead to
similar penetration across markets. Cultural characteristics based on the Hofstede
Cross Cultural Index33 and preferred leisure activities may also have an impact. This
comes through when comparing online insurance penetration to more general
e-commerce penetration. We use e-commerce buyer penetration as a proxy for
online insurance purchases because countries with a higher e-shopping penetration
also demonstrate higher online distribution of life insurance. One reason might be
that consumers who use the internet often for different purposes, including online
shopping, feel comfortable going online to buy insurance too.34, 35
̤̤ Country-specific cultural characteristics such as low “power distance”, defined as
the degree to which individuals expect and accept that power is distributed
unequally,36 high individualism and low uncertainty avoidance could influence the
adoption of technology.37, 38, 39, 40
̤̤ Countries with low power concentration have flatter hierarchies and people make
decisions by themselves, contrary to hierarchical societies where it is
unacceptable to disagree with decisions of a superior.41 Further, in individualistic
cultures people prefer to collect information on their own from direct sources such
as the internet, while in collectivist cultures people rely on subjective advice from
family and friends.42 And finally, in countries with lower uncertainty avoidance,
people feel comfortable trying new things, including new methods of buying.43, 44

30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44

The insurers in China are AnBong Life and PingAn; Insurtechs are Bihubao, HeTai and Xiaoyusan.
The US insurers include Massachusetts Mutual; Insurtechs are Ladder Life, Haven Life, Spot Life, Ethos.
The insurers in Sweden are Folksam, Scandia, Avanza, Nordea Liv, Nordnet and Idun Liv.
The Hofstede Cross Cultural Index analyses the national culture of a country based on six cultural
dimensions relative to other countries.
Bellman, S. et al., “Predictors of online buying behavior”, Communications of the ACM, 1992.
Lee, H. et al., “Consumer Lifestyles and Adoption of High-Technology Products: A Case of South Korea”,
Journal of International Consumer Marketing, Vol 21, 2009.
See Hofstede Cross Cultural Index at https://www.hofstede-insights.com/models/national-culture/
Matusitz, M. et al., “Power Distance, Uncertainty Avoidance, and Technology: Analyzing Hofstede’s
Dimensions and Human Development Indicators”, Journal of Technology in Human Services, 2013.
Özbilen, P., “The Impact of Natural Culture on New Technology Adoption by Firms: A Country Level
Analysis”, International Journal of Innovation and Technology, Vol 8, 2017.
Peterson, M. et al., “The Influence of National Culture in Information Technology Product Adoption”,
AMCIS 2003 Proceedings, Paper 119, 2003.
Lee, S. “The impact of cultural differences on technology adoption”, Journal of World Business, 2013.
Zakour, A., 2004, Cultural differences and information technology acceptance, Proceedings of the
7th Annual Conference of the Southern Association for Information Systems.
Lee, S., 2013, The impact of cultural differences on technology adoption, Journal of World Business,
Vol 48.
Laukkanen, T., “How Uncertainty Avoidance Affects Innovation Resistance in Mobile Banking?” 48th
Hawaii International Conference on System Science, 2015.
Garbarino, E. et al., “How cultural differences in uncertainty avoidance affect product perceptions”,
International Marketing Review, Vol 24, 2007.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 11

The battle for customer touchpoints

̤̤ Every country has a unique combination of cultural characteristics. China’s society
is highly collectivist and there is high-power distance, indicating that inequalities
are accepted. Yet the Chinese also appear comfortable with uncertainty, much like
the Swedes. This could explain why China has a high e-commerce buyer
penetration. So too could what count as popular leisure activities. Consumers that
engage with technology more frequently in their daily lives and free-time also
shop more online.45, 46 Noteworthy is that web surfing is a very popular free-time
activity in China (ranked first)47 and Sweden (ranked third)48; not so in Spain.49
…and where surfing the web is a
popular leisure activity.

All told, we believe that more insurance will be bought online once consumers have
easier access. The degree of online insurance purchases will grow faster in markets
with certain cultural characteristics (low power distance, high individualism, low
uncertainty avoidance), and where use of the internet is a preferred leisure activity.
To this end, we see more opportunities for online insurance purchases in markets like
Sweden, the US, the UK, Germany and China (see Figure 10).

Figure 10
Culture and leisure across markets
Factor

High individualism
Culture Low power concentration
Low uncertainty avoidance
Leisure activities*
E-commerce consumption

Sweden

US

UK

Germany

China

Spain

Italy

Turkey

✔
✔
✔
✔

✔
✔
✔
✔

✔
✔
✔
✔

✔
✔
✘
✔

✘
✘
✔
✔

✘
✘
✘
✘

✔
✘
✘
✘

✔
✘
✘
✘

80%

78%

89%

82%

71%

59%

53%

33%

Note: Digital e-commerce buyers are defined as consumers who use the Internet and have made at least one purchase online in 2017;
* 1 of 3 most preferred leisure activities includes web surfing.
Source: Swiss Re Institute

45 Li, H. et al., “The impact of perceived channel utilities, shopping orientations, and demographics on the
consumers online buying behavior”, Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, Vol 5, 1999.
46 Bellman, S. et al, 1999, op. cit.
47 Chen, M. et al., “Leisure activities and leisure motivations of Chinese residents”, PLoS ONE, Vol 13,
2018.
48 En undersökning om svenska folkets tidsanvändning år 2010/11, Statistiska CentralByrån, 2011.
49 2009-2010 Time Use Survey, Instituto National de Estadistica, 2011.

12 Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

What drives online purchasing behaviour if access is provided?
A theoretical framework helps
understanding of what affects the
decision to buy cover online.

Models based on consumer value and need theories can help answer the above
question.50, 51, 52 Figure 11 depicts a theoretical model tailored to online life insurance
buying behaviour. It consists of three value drivers: functionality, emotions and
personal growth. To date, insurance product design has mostly focussed on
functionality, with little consideration of emotional and personal growth values.

Figure 11
Schematic showing of drivers of insurance purchasing behaviour model
Functionality
̤̤ Ease of purchase process
̤̤ Convenience
̤̤ Immediate and fast purchase process
̤̤ Better price

Emotions
̤̤ Low pressure
̤̤ Enjoyment
̤̤ Painless process
̤̤ Feeling of relief
̤̤ Feeling of comfortability

Personal growth
̤̤ Empowerment
̤̤ Epistemic value

Consumption behaviour
Source: Swiss Re Institute

Consumers value simplicity and want
to be emotionally fulfilled.

Analysing 400 consumer reviews of two US digital life insurers (Ladder Life and
Haven Life), we find that when consumers buy cover online, they value functional but
also emotional and personal growth elements (eg, empowerment).53 The most
commonly mentioned emotions are “no pain” and feeling of “happiness” and
“delight”; 23% said they find buying online “painless” while 22% said they feel
“great” to buy online. Another 20% of consumers said they “enjoy” completing their
application and purchase online. Nearly 17% said they feel lower pressure not being
in contact with an insurance agent.

They enjoy products that address
personal growth values.

The personal growth values perceived by consumers mostly relate to empowerment.
Consumers value the ability to acquire information on product prices and terms, and
to be able to decide by themselves which policy best fits their needs. One consumer
stated, for instance, “it was great (…) to get the information to make a decision
yourself”.54 These empowered consumers are no longer passive shoppers
dependent on an agent’s advice. They are active participants who want information
to make their own decisions.55

50 M. Holbrook, Customer Value: A framework for analysis and research, Routledge, 1999.
51 J. Sheth, et al, “Why We Buy What We Buy: A theory of consumption value”, Journal of Business
Research, Vol 22, 1991.
52 A. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation”, Psychological Review, Vol 50, 1943.
53 “Reviews”, trustpilot.com, and consumeraffairs.com last accessed 22 August 2019.
54 Consumer review quoted from consumeraffairs.com, 1 February 2018.
55 P. Bühler, P. Maas, “Consumer empowerment in insurance”, International Journal of Bank Marketing,
Vol 36, 2018.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 13

The battle for customer touchpoints

Insurers need to better relate with
consumers on higher-level emotional
attributes.

These value drivers play an important role in understanding consumers’ choice
behaviour and future purchasing intentions.56, 57 For example, Alibaba’s critical illness
insurance58 and Lemonade’s home insurance59, 60 offer a simple and immediate
purchase process, and also address emotional and personal growth values (see
Figure 12). In the case of Alibaba, consumers emotionally experience insurance as a
community product since they only contribute to a pay-out when someone is ill. The
personal growth value (empowerment) is fulfilled by allowing a large group of preapproved consumers decide through a collective voting system whether a pay-out
should be approved.61, 62

Figure 12
Examples of insurance products based on the three value drivers
Cases: designing insurance based on functional, emotional and personal growth values
Case 1
Alibaba's critical illness insurance
The purchase process is simple and immediate via
the transaction app Alipay.

Case 2
Lemonade's home insurance
The purchase process is simple and immediate via
the Lemonade app or a laptop/tablet.

Emotional value

Consumers experience insurance as a community
product since they only collectively contribute to
the payout when someone is ill.

Customers choose a non-profit organisation for the
leftover money from the monthly flat fee and join a
community that believes in the same cause.

Personal growth value
(empowerment)

(Empowerment): Preapproved consumers decide
themselves through a collective voting system
whether a payout for claimants should be
approved.

(Empowerment): consumers are empowered by
deciding which social cause they want to choose
for their leftover money.

Functional value

Source: Swiss Re Institute, based on information from company websites

In the future, all ages will be attracted
to digital insurance.

In the next three to five years, the digital insurance consumer will likely remain the
Millennials, with higher levels of income and education. In the longer-term, as
millennials become seniors, all age groups will be attracted to digital insurance, with
income and education less relevant factors in purchase decisions. New, innovative
digital cover options for consumers with lower income are already available. For
instance, micro L&H insurance products offered by China Life63, PROSUR64 or
Jubilee,65 and also Alibaba’s critical illness product “Xiang Hu Bao” attract
consumers from all backgrounds, irrespective of income and education levels.66

56 J. Sheth, et al, “Why We Buy What We Buy: A theory of consumption value”, Journal of Business
Research, Vol 22, 1991.
57 M. Holbrook, Customer Value: A framework for analysis and research, Routledge, 1999.
58 “Alipay Health Plan Aiming For 300m Users”, alizila.com, 11 April 2019.
59 “Instant everything” on Lemonade.com
60 “The Lemonade Giveback” on Lemonade.com
61 Ant Financial Aims to Disrupt Health Insurance with New Chinese Health ‘Collective’,
insurancejournal.com, 11 April 2019.
62 “Jack MA is Selling Cancer Coverage for Pennies a Month in China”, bloomberg.com, 20 May 2019.
63 Microinsurance and rural development in China: A Q&A with Associate Professor Yi Yao (Kitty) of
Peking University, MicroInsurance Center at at Milliman, 21 March 2019.
64 “POSUR Micro-Insurance” on prosur.com.kh/
65 “Micro Insurance: Enabling people to overcome uncertainty”, jubilee.com, 23 August 2014.
66 insurancejournal.com, 11 April 2019, op. cit.

14

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

The digital insurer
The future insurer will be hyper-aware of customers needs and preferences, and offer personalised, flexible products
and services in real time. Data-enabled processes will minimise friction and streamline the customer insurance
journey, from request for coverage to claim. Artificial intelligence will be used to interact and build understanding of
the customer, and servicing will be through (personal) virtual assistance, 24/7.

The offering
Personalised, social, sustainable and engaging
Digitisation can provide more timely
feedback loops.

Digitalisation can provide far more timely feedback to insurers by leveraging a range
of daily interactions, for example across mobility, health and recreational behaviour.
Feedback loops have always existed in insurance, influencing purchasing patterns,
insureds’ risk behaviours and how they make claims. The feedback has traditionally
been ex-post, and that has sometimes meant a long time lag.

Balance autonomous insights and empathetic care
These constant feedback-based
processes provide better insights for
risk management…

Digitalisation goes beyond data collection. It also gives insurers power to understand
risks more dynamically.67 Insurers may discover uncovered exposures that they can
seek to close (see Figure 13). For example, combining traffic, weather patterns and
other factors, insurers may determine that a driver spends the majority of time on
higher-risk roads. Insurers are taking first steps in engaging customers in an
empathetic manner based on such observed behaviours. For example, Generali has
a real-time coaching tool for motor insurance clients, helping them drive better and
work on accident prevention. The focus is currently on mobility services, with plans
to expand to other areas.68

Access risk insights across new touchpoints and channel formats
…and allow insurers to propose
innovative coverages quicker.

With digitalisation, insurers can obtain risk-related data from a variety of touchpoints,
and can identify and monitor existing and new risk exposures. New data sources and
analytical capabilities can provide instant in-depth view of risks across touchpoints,
which facilitates quicker risk assessment and allows insurers to propose innovative
and relevant coverage. Pre-digital, insurers have had to wait till loss data is available
to assess if a customer is adequately covered.

67 For example, when someone stops working due to a disability, insurers can use data to suggest ways to
help the customer recover more quickly. See “MetLife hooks into external data feeds to help curb
customer risk”, CIO.com, 15 October 2018.
68 “We innovate for our customers”, on generali.com

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 15

The digital insurer

Figure 13
Insights improve the existing value chain
Smart interactions

Smart mobility
living / workin
g
Smart
Smart health

Active break

Start work
Park & ride
(mobility)

End work

Breakfast with
family
Sleep

Outdoor
activity

Shopping
Family

Risk-related interactions
Digital risk-related
interactions
Identification/monitoring of existing
and clients risk exposure
Reducing /adapting existing protection gap
growth / profitability adoption on existing
and new customers
Product
management

UWR
pricing

Identification /monitoring of new/
future risk exposure
Generating new protection related products
and services (value propositions)

Marketing
& sales

Claims
management

Retail business

L

H

Source: Swiss Re Institute

16

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

P

Customer
service

Corporate business

C

Risk exposure
Over-insurance
Under-insurance
(protection gap)

L

H

P

C

Shift from product to service orientation
Insurance will thus become more
proactive.

Digital interactions will enable insurers to create personalised insurance and new
protection-related services. Traditional risk selection will remain a core activity, but
will be faster, simpler and based on real-time data. Greater volumes of digital data
will help quantify different kinds of exposure, (eg, behavioural, external and internal,
see Figure 14).
̤̤ Behavioural exposure is the risk of aberrant actions, such as driver speeding,
failing to maintain safe distance, or choosing dangerous routes.
̤̤ Internal risk exposure covers the inherent risk of each insured or asset (eg, quality
of construction for a property).
̤̤ External risk exposure covers environmental factors like catastrophe risks for
property, or bad weather and street conditions for drivers.

Figure 14
Representation of an ideal state of risk quantification
Life & health insurance

Property insurance

Automotive insurance
offline
online

Customer journey
Data
collection

Classical lines
of business

Risk exposure:
internal

external

Sensor

behavioural
Identification of risk exposure: contextual risk exposure
(evidence based analytics and decisions – timing – relevance)
Relevant product/service offering: contextual content, products and services
(risk transfer, risk mitigation and preventive services, value adding services)

Risk-related offerings

Partner and community integration/intervention: access/sharing/steering
(to the support community, partner network)

Life area clusters
Health

Education/working

Living

Free time

Mobility

Source: Swiss Re Institute

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 17

The digital insurer

This ideal state is still a way off.

The key task for insurers is to develop their digital capabilities to access relevant
information about changes in risk exposures, convert them into actionable insights
and then package and communicate these to customers in a user-friendly manner.
To do this, insurers need to upgrade digital capabilities across three areas.
1	Identify true risk exposures: Not all data can be used for risk exposure
identification. Insurers need to understand risk exposure (evidence-based
analytics and decisions), based on timing, relevance and true signalling power.
2 C
 reate relevant product/service offerings: Insurance cover should adapt to
changing needs, ensuring that cover is appropriate across different life stages. To
this end, insurers will need to be able to contextualise products and services (risk
mitigation and preventive services, value adding services).
3	Partner and community integration/intervention: Insurers can steer the
support community and partner network. With advanced analytics, they will be
able to identify customers most likely to buy based on risk sub-segments.

Higher-quality service will lead to
greater loyalty.

As insurers refine these capabilities, they will be able to provide higher-quality
service interactions, which should lead to greater loyalty. For example, if a property
insurer can access and analyse data on changes in risk exposure, whether from
owned or third-party data, it can enable safety and security services to prevent
damage and losses. It could also advise on real estate purchases across hundreds of
relevant risk variables. For example, one insurer is exploring how to engage with
customers on predictive indicators such as if a property is in public transit corridors,
the number of emergency calls made from the property, hygiene of nearby
restaurants, and infrastructure quality in the area.69

Insurers in emerging markets are
leapfrogging peers in advanced
markets in some innovative areas...

Technology is accelerating the development of insurance in emerging markets. What
took many years of development in advanced markets is being compressed into just
a few years in the emerging territories. This is “leapfrogging”, where some
technology steps are skipped. These disruptive technologies are facilitating
convenient access to insurance products and services as part of local requirements.

...and are working with digital
ecosystems to extend their reach.

Insurers in emerging markets are taking the lead in leveraging new digital
ecosystems; these offer multiple touchpoints to capture user attention, and often
evolve from their original businesses, to move into new domains. Such as in the case
of Grab based in Asia, which started with passenger mobility, then entered food and
goods delivery, and is now expanding into healthcare.70 Insurers in Asia are forming
partnerships with such firms: the insurer brings the underwriting expertise and the
partner firm an entry point to ecosystems, allowing the insurer to extend its reach,
target specific segments and mine user behaviour. Along these lines, in China, Aviva
has partnered with internet major Tencent to sell critical illness policies online. In
another example, in Africa insurers are selling insurers through ride sharing drivers in
mobility ecosystems.71

69 “MetLife hooks into external data feeds to help curb customer risk”, CIO Magazine, 15 October 2018.
70 “Ping An Good Doctor and Grab Form Joint Venture to Deliver Transformative O2O Healthcare Solutions
in Southeast Asia”, grab.com, 16 August 2018.
71 “How Nairobi-Based Ridesharing Service Little Competes With Uber in Africa”, skift.com,
19 June 2018.

18 Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Insurers can use digital platforms that are modern and flexible
Flexible and modern platforms can
help insurers enter new markets.

Insurers can leverage flexible, product-agnostic and fully-integrated digital platforms
to engage with customers through the buying journey. Core value chain components
like underwriting can be transformed into insurance as a service (see Figure 15). For
example, Swiss Re has a partnering solution, iptiQ, that allows insurers to harness
the power of cloud applications and data analytics to make buying cover easier.72

They also connect market services for
different parties.

Platforms can also act as intermediaries connecting market services for different
parties, (eg, enabling brokers to manage and deliver cross-border programs from a
single online platform).73 Two types of platforms have been established. First, core
service platforms. which enable part or the whole value chain of an established
industry as a service (IaaS – Insurance as a Service solutions). Second, service
platforms, which act as intermediaries between supply and demand. In rare cases a
combination of both platform types may be established.74

Figure 15
Depiction of opportunities for platforms in insurance
Customers

Primary
insurance

Distribution
partner

Reinsurance

Distribution
partner

Distribution
partner

Retrocessions

B2C
Retail

B2B

B2B

B2B

B2B

B2B

B2B
Corporate
*)

Core
service
platform
Market
service
platform

Product
management
Service interaction platform (services)
Process platform (value chain)
Technology platform (enablement)
Platform management (coordination & governance)

UWR
pricing

Marketing &
Claims
sales
management

Customer
service

*) Industry, insurance, banks,
intermediaries, aggregators,
brokers, platforms, ecosystems

Source: Swiss Re Institute

72 Swiss Re's partnering solution iptiQ allows insurers to harness the power of cloud-based applications
and data analytics to make buying insurance easier, and to help more people to become insured. See
iptiQ: The technology making it easier to buy insurance, Swiss Re, 7 November 2018.
73 Swiss Re Corporate Solutions announces collaboration to build a multinational insurance program
management platform for Brokerslink, Swiss Re Corporate Solutions, 18 October 2019.
74 Starling’s Marketplace delivers an ‘app store’ experience for financial services, NS Banking,
27 February 2019.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 19

The digital insurer

Insurers can use expose these
platforms to influence brokers to
partner with them. This allows a
seamless customer journey across the
value chain.

The benefit of these platforms is that insurers can use APIs to integrate with external
partners, eg, ecommerce to bring significant efficiency across the value chain due to
seamless information exchange. Different components (from need analysis to policy
issue) can be customized and co-branded for these distribution partners who can
choose which products they want to offer to consumers. This allows a seamless
customer journey across the value chain by virtue of remaining on single platform.
These platforms can be multi-device (optimised for desktop, tablet and smart
phone), and multi-channel, ie, customers can switch between face-to-face with an
agent to self-service and can even work with an agent in a call centre with their data
being saved and shared.

The value chain will become more integrated
To iterate quickly, processes will
become flexible and open to
innovation.

The first wave of digitalisation has made the insurance value chain more efficient
(see Figure 16). However, multiple digital silos remain unconnected and information
is compartmentalised. In the future, critical processes will be connected, and
insurers will progress from being mere “digitalised insurance providers” to “digital
insurers”. The potential for transformation does not end there. Looking further ahead,
as data quality and algorithms improve, the next generation will be AI insurers with
value chains that “learn” from data generated by consumers, ecosystems and
governments. Developments in cognitive technologies will help such insurers
integrate learning to adapt value propositions in real-time, thereby providing a
holistic and unique customer experience.

Figure 16
Insurance products growing into a comprehensive risk service
Involved stakeholder

Value chain (example)

Insurance

(Icon)

Product
management

UWR
pricing

Marketing &
sales

Claims
management

Customer
service

Digitalised
insurance

(Icon)

Product
management

UWR
pricing

Marketing &
sales

Claims
management

Customer
service

Digital
insurance

(Icon)

Product
management

UWR
pricing

Marketing &
sales

Claims
management

Customer
service

Data & AIdriven
insurance

(Icon)

Source: Swiss Re Institute

20 Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Product = service

Better data and digital triggers will
accelerate the adoption of parametric
insurance.

The availability of such high-quality underlying data will also make it easier to create
products with digital triggers, and will speed up the adoption of parametric
insurance. Property-level flood insurance that utilises data-feeds from sensors in
homes and businesses for parametric triggers is already available.75 Basis risk should
be much lower because the trigger is based on a data source in the property itself.
Over time this will virtualise the value chain and lead to products becoming more
parametric in nature (see Smart contracts).

Smart contracts
Smart contracts can automatically
recognise that the terms of an
insurance policy have been met.

The concept of smart contracts aligns with the idea of an AI-driven insurer
constructed on an interplay between multiple value-chain components. Smart
contracts are self-executing software programs that, for instance, can make a
payment when triggered by occurrence of a risk event. Legal (contract) logic is put
into computational logic, such that a string of computer code recognises that the
terms of a contract or insurance policy have been met. It automatically transfers
funds (insurance payouts) at the agreed time and registers those transfers.

However, as of yet there is no
international regulation specific to
smart contracts.

Existing insurance contracts need to be translated into computational logic. So far,
the most promising cases have been in parametric insurance. Lines of business
where telematics can be used, such as motor, aviation, cargo and agriculture, offer
potential. However, certain challenges stand in the way of wider adoption of smart
contracts. Notably, as of yet there is no international regulation specific to smart
contracts. As Lloyds recently pointed out, it is unclear how policyholders who
disagree with an automatic decision not to trigger cover can defend themselves.76

Challenges to digitalisation
Regulation
Monitoring yet facilitating innovation
is a priority for regulators.

The regulatory framework will play an important role in shaping the integration of
new technology into the insurance space. In monetising the potential of
digitalisation, insurers could face regulatory challenges on data protection and
privacy, providing incorrect advice, and records retention. Errors or bias in algorithms
that might contribute to systemic risk or prompt inappropriate insurance decisions is
also an area of regulatory scrutiny. Likewise, it might be difficult for regulators to
understand why a complex and proprietary algorithm decided to deny coverage or
reject a claim, undermining their ability to fulfil their supervisory and consumer
protection tasks.

Insurers could also face countryspecific regulatory limitations.

Regulators are also wary of unsolicited use of data. Insurers also face countryspecific regulatory limitations and high implementation efforts for product
development and modifications. They will have to construct a robust system of data
governance to win both customer trust and abide by regulation. There may be
additional legal and compliance challenges, such as integrating multiple vendors into
one proposition.

75 JBA & FloodFlash launch sensor-based parametric flood cover first, Artemis, 27 June 2019.
76 Triggering innovation, Lloyds, 2019.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 21

The digital insurer

Ownership of data and willingness to share
Consumer reticence to share data
varies by country and there may be
resistance in some contexts.

As data become easier to collect, an increasingly important consideration will be
ownership. For example, ownership of images of properties surveyed by drones may
rest with clients, not insurers. Consumer reticence to share data varies from countryto-country, and there may be resistance to do so in some contexts. For example,
some employers that offer workers boots, gloves and vests with wearables have
found some employees refuse to be monitored.77 This behaviour differs by line of
business; a recent survey found US consumers more willing to share health-related
data than home-related data.78

The focus should be on loss
prevention rather than personalised
premiums.

Another survey found that consumers are cautious about sharing data, even when
they know it will lead to a more personalised experience.79 However, an Accenture
survey found that eight of 10 would share personal data (eg, on income, location and
lifestyle habits) with insurers if it lowers risk of injury or loss.80 This suggests
messaging around data sharing is more effective if the focus is more on loss
prevention rather than personalised premiums.

Better to ask fewer, more focused
questions.

Data is not easily available in the required depth and detail. Insurers will have to strike
a balance between more and relevant data. Data can be easily misinterpreted if the
background context is not fully understood. For example, a non-smoker who on
occasion buys cigarettes for a parent could be identified as a casual smoker, and
could be subject to higher premium rates when buying health insurance. Does more
data help or confuse? In some cases, asking fewer but more focused questions could
lead to more precise answers.

Data availability

Consumer wariness about automation
But some policyholders may be less
comfortable with digitisation.

Some consumers may be less comfortable in an automated world. For example,
48% of surveyed consumers said they worry about mistakes while filling out
insurance forms, and 46% fear that claims pay-outs might not be accurately
calculated by machines.81 Policyholders may be divided in their views on
digitalisation. It is vital to win customer confidence by reassuring them about
machine accuracy and developing checkpoints to help them avoid mistakes.

77 “The Exciting, New Ways Technology Is Streamlining the Claims Management Process”,
Risk&Insurance, 5 August 2019.
78 U.S. Consumer Survey: A Connected-Devices Insurance Roadmap, Aite Group, 20 May 2019.
79 “Promise of personalization has little impact on consumer willingness to share data, study reveals”,
Marketing Dive, 14 August 2019.
80 64% of consumers are willing to share data in exchange for adjusted car insurance premiums based on
safe driving and 52% are willing to share data in exchange for life insurance premiums tied to a healthy
lifestyle. See Six in Ten Consumers Willing to Share Significant Personal Data with Banks and Insurers
in Exchange for Lower Pricing, Accenture Study Finds, Accenture, 14 March 2019.
81 “Future of Claims: Customers Still Want Humans In Process – But Not Too Many”, Carrier Management,
24 March 2019.

22 Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Marketing, distribution and servicing
Insurers are moving away from a product-focused sales approach to one closely tied to the broader needs of the
customer, with greater focus on the human experience. New generations of systems will grant unprecedented levels
of proximity and influence on customers, and insurers will be able to optimise interaction across a diverse range of
customer touchpoints.

Marketing to become more granular
Insurers can use new data to build a
consumer journey based on human
experience.

Historically, insurance marketing has been about aggregating prospective buyers
into groups likely to have common needs and respond similarly to marketing. Typical
attributes include geography, demographics, psychographics (eg, values, attitudes,
lifestyles) and behavioural aspects (eg, price sensitivity). This approach leads to a
relative broad spectrum of consumers in a segment, which can limit effective
targeting. With new sources of digital data on life events such as purchase histories,
travel behaviour, customer service records, data from devices, wearables and also
social networks, insurers can employ advanced analytics techniques to yield more
granular classification of existing and prospective customers (see Table 1).82, 83

Table 1
Evolution of marketing and distribution innovation timeline
Marketing and
distribution journey

Customer experience
Market size/sentiment
analysis
Personalisation
Channel evolution

Fulfillment

Past

Present

Future

Key enablers

Fragmented, limited
channels
Time consuming,
Physical
Not possible, very
expensive
Agent-driven, door-todoor

Multichannel, somewhat
integrated
Tech-based, still takes
time
Possible, limited scope

Seamless, continuous

Direct (online, contact
center, bots), Tech
enabled agents
Direct to home

Ecosystem based with
virtual connect

Platform economy,
insights available
Online surveys, digital
behavior
Shorter development
time, data insights
Chatbots and machine
learning

Exhausting & time
consuming

Tremendous efficiency
and accuracy gains
Complete customisation

Needs-based “just in
time”

Source: Swiss Re Institute

82 sigma 6/2015, Life insurance in the digital age: fundamental transformation ahead, Swiss Re,
December 2015
83 Ibid.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 23

Marketing, distribution and servicing

Smart interaction: the future of marketing
This can boost customer loyalty.

This personalisation can improve loyalty management and impact customer lifetime
value (CLTV).84 Historically the focus of insurer engagement with customers has
been on sales and claims. With new data sources and advanced analytics, insurers
can interact with customers over their lifetime on a wide range of relevant issues,
developing systems that help them listen, engage and act both proactively and
reactively (see Figure 17).

Figure 17
Schematic showing how smart interaction increases loyalty and customer equity
Without/only limited interaction management

With intensive interaction management

CLTV segment

CLTV segment
Customer journey
Mailing
Claim

Customer journey

Potential

Historical focus only on
sales (distribution) and claims
CLTV

CLTV

Listen

Engage

Act

CLTV
Owned

Paid

Paid

Earned

Earned

Social

Social

Reactive

Owned

CLTV
Proactive

Invoice

Value for the customer
Content
Communication

Interaction

Collaboration
Community

Content

Collaboration

Communication

Community

Insurance products and services

Source: Swiss Re Institute

Lifestyle related interactions will help
build deeper one-to-one relationships,
at scale.

The more high-quality interactions there are, the more loyal customers will be. To this
end, insurers can pro-actively use digital engagement to reduce policyholder churn.
For example, recently a major P&C carrier ran a three-month pilot, sending
personalised automated texts to delinquent customers and followed up with a phone
call, creating a new level of proactive digital and human engagement. Less than 2%
of customers opted out, and a large majority of delinquent customers were retained.
There was less manual work: the approach yielded results with 50% fewer outbound
calls.85 Insurers can broaden the scope of these interactions with policyholders to a
wider sets of prospects. For example, some insurers have decoupled insurance from
their telematics apps. The app is available to all drivers rather than insureds alone.86

84 Customer lifetime value or CLTV is a measure of net profit attributed to the entire future relationship.
85 Strategy Meets Action. Proactive Digital Engagement: From Reactive to Proactive: A Paradigm Shift for
Insurers, Hearsay Systems, August 2019.
86 Insurance Innovation of the Month: AIG on the Go, EFMA, 15 January 2019.

24

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Distribution: traditional touchpoints will adapt
Capitalising on unique moments will
be key to increasing loyalty and
customer lifetime value.

With digitalisation, insurers will be better able to identify where human interactions
play a significant role. Capitalising on unique moments will be key to increase CLTV.
Currently digital interactions are mostly transactional (post-sale interactions focused
on billing and claims handling), and miss opportunities for insurers to address the full
range of customer needs. Insurers need to understand where and how empathy is an
important component of brand value by offering a unified customer experience.
Automated data capture and synchronisation with customer relationship
management (CRM) systems offer actionable insights. For example, agents are
alerted when a customer files a digital notice of loss claim and can use that event as
an opportunity to call on the same day to better understand other life events (eg, a
baby on the way) and, if appropriate within the contextual setting, cross-sell.87

Intermediaries: their role will change
Agents will act as risk consultants with
a fuller view of customers' life events.

As customers become more comfortable with buying insurance online, the role of
intermediaries will evolve. Agents will act as risk consultants with an overview of
what’s happening with each customer across the value chain. Insurers and agents
will also need to rethink traditional cooperation models, including how intermediaries
are compensated. For example, a client acquired online may require advice from an
agent. A compensation model that rewards agents for these services via advisory
fees that consumers are willing to pay, may help alleviate channel conflicts that could
arise within a pure commissions-based system. 88

In commercial, small and medium
sized business are also becoming
more open to digital distribution.

New distribution technology has not impacted wholesale commercial insurance
markets as much as retail/personal lines. However, there are some initiatives to
simplify parts of the value chain in commercial insurance. Lloyd’s of London for
example, mandated its syndicates to use electronic placements for no less than 30%
of their written risks by the end of 2018.89 Online brokers for small and medium
businesses (SME) are also seeing traction. For instance, Embroker and CoverHound
use data verification technology to obtain immediately bindable quotes, allowing
customers to complete the process almost seamlessly online.90 These platforms offer
additional services (eg, help SMEs upload and compare policies, generate vendor
certificates, and asset tracking), which can strengthen customer loyalty.

87 [Insurance] The Next-Gen Customer Experience – A Dreamforce Case Study, Hearsay Systems,
16 October 2018.
88 sigma 6/2015 op. cit.
89 “Lloyd’s issues electronic placement mandate”, Lloyds.com, 20 March 2018.
90 See Embroker, CoverHound.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 25

Marketing, distribution and servicing

Digitally-augmented channels on the rise
Digitally-augmented channels,
combining man and machine will
become more common.

Figure 18
Data and AI-driven augmented
advisors

Smart-augmented
platform
Digitally-augmented
empathic human interface

New digital interactions will be driven by next-generation empathetic advisory tools,
augmented by AI (see Figure 18). Agents and brokers will leverage these to refine
their communication to adapt to the customer’s emotional, situational and personal
contexts. The power is in combining both functional and empathetic interfaces. The
functional interface performs the analytics and provides the intelligence, such as
next best action. The agents/brokers provide the human or empathetic interface.

Retail customer/
Commercial customer
Intermediaries
Platform/ecosytem
Broker/3rd Party
Marketplace
Aggregator

Provider
Bank
Insurer/reinsurer

Interactions

Digitally-augmented
digital interface
Source: Swiss Re Institute

Big Tech, intermediaries and insurers
will invest in different interaction
channels.

We believe the use of digital advisors which combine these two capabilities will
drive digital interactions in a targeted manner in the future. Generating this
intelligence will become a core capability, and not just for insurers. Depending on
who the provider is, there could be three types or levels of digital interaction channel.
These could work in co-existence, although the one perceived by consumers as
most trustworthy and unbiased will likely hold a distinctive competitive advantage.
̤̤ “Direct” customer advisors (insurer agnostic), offered by technology companies.
For example, these could be enhanced versions of today’s Siri/Alexa/Google
duplex assistants.
̤̤ The “intermediary advisor”, which feeds intermediaries with better insights so that
back-office responsibilities are minimised, and agents can focus on human
relations and empathy, augmented by better risk insights and data.
̤̤ The “product advisor”, which is fully insurer-owned. Such as, for example, GEICO’s
mobile virtual assistant Kate, which intuitively guides customers to the relevant
information about their policy and helps in self-service tasks.
Customers may use all three set ups. For example, for L&H insurance they may go to
an intermediary, for home insurance direct to an insurer, and for mobility and travel
insurance use an enhanced version of customer advisors like Google Assistant.
Intermediaries will continue to play an important role, although human interaction
may in some cases become less part of the standard process. Where human
involvement can be of added value is where the emphasis is on contextual “empathic
interactions”. In the new competitive landscape, insurers will need to balance these
customer interactions in the right manner using new loyalty and interaction systems.

26 Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Servicing: loyalty and new risk management needs
Additional digital tools and valueadded services will help brokers push/
distribute to customers.

Servicing is all about building deeper 1-2-1 relationship with customers at scale
through risk prevention and value adding services (VAS).91 This is especially critical
in commercial lines where specialised knowledge can be leveraged. Whichever
party along the value chain possesses specialised knowledge and provides robust
engagement will control servicing.
There is significant scope for insurers to enable agents and brokers with digital tools
and value-added services. J.D. Power measures satisfaction scores among business
relationships, and finds that insurance agents currently report low satisfaction with
the service they receive from personal lines and commercial lines insurers.92 The
advent of digital engagement in servicing has several implications for insurers:
̤̤ The boundaries of traditional insurance are becoming blurred, and distribution is
moving towards an integrated ecosystem focusing on an end-to-end buying
experience. A survey by Accenture found that three in five insurers (59%) are
forming relationships with non-traditional partners to reach customers in new
ways and create new value.93 This will have an impact on all aspects of the value
chain. To fully realise the benefits of these partnerships, insurers will need to
upgrade their predictive analytics capabilities, obtaining risk-related data from a
variety of touchpoints and providing tailored content.
̤̤ Customers want a positive experience across multiple channels and touchpoints.
Gartner believes that in the coming five years, event-triggered and real-time
marketing will make the biggest impact across industries.94 However loyalty will
be hard to come by. Digital-only customers still give their insurers lower loyalty
scores than do multi-channel customers.95 There is a misalignment between what
customers expect from digital channels and what insurers provide. For example,
some insurers fail to replicate certain service components, such as their Contact
Us page, from their web to mobile sites.96
̤̤ Shifts toward platform plays and ecosystems appear inevitable, in both personal
and commercial lines. E-commerce firms, retailers, automotive OEMs and other
non-traditional players are developing, owning and offering new and unique
product propositions to customers. They build platforms based on plug-and-pay
principles to allow third-party connections. Insurers need to be more cognizant
that different elements in the value chain own different customer touchpoints.

91 Srikanth Madani, Hypotheses on Innovation Direction in Insurance, St Gallen Risk & Finance, 2019.
92 “Insurers Come Up Short for Independent Agents Despite Critical Role Agents Play in Driving Business,
J.D. Power Finds”, prnewswire.com, 31 January 2019.
93 Accenture, Technology Vision for Insurance 2019, Accenture, 10 April 2019.
94 Gartner Identifies Four Emerging Trends That Will Transform How Marketers Run Their Technology
Ecosystems, Gartner, 29 August 2019.
95 Bain and Company, 10 October 2018. op. cit.
96 Gartner Says U.S. Insurance Brands Underperform in Digital, Despite Customers’ Growing Willingness
to Provide Data, Gartner, 10 July 2019.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 27

Product development and underwriting
From bikes to trainers, customers like tailored rather than off-the-shelf products. The same will become increasingly
prevalent in insurance. Over time Big Data and sophisticated models will allow risk pricing at increasingly granular
levels. Emergence of new risks will create new underwriting and portfolio risk management techniques.

Digital-enabled product development
Real-time demand assessment
Digitisation will enable direct
touchpoints with customers and
real-time demand assessment.

Increasing digitalisation will present opportunities to connect directly with
customers and assess product demand in real-time, rather than rely solely on
channel partners (see Table 2). For example, in-app surveys and tracking search
behaviour will provide clues about unmet customer needs. Based on granular
customer data, insurers can more precisely segment customers and develop tailored
products. Moreover, timing of product searches, when correlated with personal data,
may provide the context in which a product is demanded. Such constant feedback
will help insurers develop new products but also refine/adjust existing ones.97

Table 2
Impact of digitisation on product development journey
Product development
journey

Demand assessment

Coverage design

Past

Present

Future

Key enablers

Time consuming,
dependent on channel
partners
Fixed coverage for longer
duration

More efficient, based on
limited customer data
collection
Partially modular
coverage for shorter
duration
Short-period pricing
based on limited
behavioral data
Extended partnerships
across insurance value
chain
Sandbox
experimentation on
data-based evidence
Limited feedback based
mainly on claims
experience

Real -time, based on
changing customer life
stages
Completely modular and
real-time coverage

Online surveys, digital
behavior tracking

Pricing

Fixed pricing for defined
risk categories

Partnership strategy

Mainly distributionbased partnerships

Regulatory approach

Finite experimentation
due to lack of data

Customer feedback

Almost non-existent

Hyper connectivity
enabled by sensors, 5G,
LPWAN95 and satellites

Dynamic pricing based
on real time behavioral
data
Ecosystem partnerships
driven by cross-industry
value chains
Approval for wide range
of data in risk modelling

APIs96, cross industry
ecosystems

Continuous feedback at
multiple touchpoints

End to end digital
delivery of products

Sandboxes and
innovation hubs

Source: Swiss Re Institute

9899

97 K. Cool, C. Angoulvant, et.al., “ZhongAn’s Micropremium Model: The Future of Insurance?”,
knowlege.insead.edu, 18 May 2018.
98 Low Powered Wide Area Network, a low bandwidth wireless technology covering wide areas.
99 An interface or communication protocol that allows two software programs to talk to each other.

28 Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Data-driven and granular insights to facilitate new risk covers
Digitisation has enabled coverage
customisation, while preserving base
product structure.

At present, digitalisation drives modest coverage customisation in products. Such
incremental innovation preserves the basic product structure, while using short time
scales to price short duration covers and add-ons to provide coverage carve outs.
These solutions are either white labelled or written directly by insurers.100 Most of
the covers are fixed for shorter durations. Products may use sensors to track asset
usage or movement of individuals to activate coverage or offer minor premium
credits, but this information is not widely used for real-time underwriting and pricing.

Real-time risk data will facilitate more
innovative insurance solutions.

In the sharing economy, modularisation and real-time coverage adjustment will
enable new products to adapt to the frequently changing risk profiles.101
Modularisation means the de- or re-coupling of coverage and services to suit the
changing needs of a customer.102 Personal risk exposures will be tracked and
modelled more easily so that insurers can more confidently de-couple coverage
elements within existing monolithic products. Commercial risks are more complex
and do not change as frequently. Digitalisation can help in coverage re-coupling
across products to reduce protection gaps and achieve price efficiencies. In this
dynamic environment, product life cycles will get shorter and speed-to-market will
be crucial.103

Better data quality is facilitating
construction of new risk indices and
creating new markets.

Some innovative products for new risk pools are emerging with granular data
collection and analysis enabled by digitalisation. For example, we see first solutions
emerging for personal cyber, use of cryptocurrency exchanges, or IoT infrastructure
risks.104 Better data quality also facilitates construction of new risk indices and
parametric products, such as covers to protect against economic impacts of
infectious disease outbreaks. These use pathogen sentiment indices from digital
sources to gauge public fear and behavioural changes to measure the cost of
epidemics.105 In the future, we think algorithmic risk products will become
mainstream, with assets and processes becoming more autonomous and intelligent.

100 Toffee insurance, Trov and Element are examples of agencies providing pay-as-you go insurance via
online portals. Metromile and Lemonade are licensed insurers with usage-based products.
101 Traditional asset insurance mandated a clear commercial or personal insurable interest. However, this
classification is blurring with the sharing economy allowing individuals to put personal assets to
commercial use via online platforms.
102 See Mobility ecosystems striving towards a seamless interface for customers. Swiss Re, 2018.
103 Current average speed-to-market is eight months for new Life and Annuity products, and four months
for modifications. For Property and Casualty insurers, it is seven months for new products and three
months for modifications. See Speed to market for life/annuity insurers, Novarica, March 2019 and
Speed to market for property/casualty insurers, Novarica, March 2019.
104 Bitflyer and Mitsui Sumitomo are selling insurance for users of Cryptocurrency, while Munich Re and
Relayr have developed customized insurance products to facilitate IoT infrastructure investments.
105 Andrew W. Singer, “The Evolution of Parametric Insurance”, rmmagazine.com, 1 April 2019.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 29

Product development and underwriting

Dynamic risk pricing to drive behavioural change
Pricing based on granular data will
generate premium efficiencies and
mould consumer behaviour.

Insurers will be able to micro-segment risk pools, thus accurately reflecting the risk of
each unit within an insured pool. For example, Zurich Insurance in Spain partners
with Klinc to offer coverage that can be turned on and off. This is for personal devices
and other items from a catalogue of over 2 000 products, and there are plans to
expand into categories like auto and home, all enabled by availability of granular
behavioural data and advanced modelling.106, 107 Such pricing may change
dynamically, based on changing risk profiles.108 Going forward, cross-industry
platforms and seamless insurance portability can integrate all the risks, exposures
and covers for an insured under a universal insurance policy. This policy will be
customised according to the insured and it will adapt the coverage in real-time on
the basis of a change in the insured’s risk profile (see Figure 19).

Figure 19
Tech-enabled insurance product and service opportunities
Off-the-shelf coverage

Digitalisation-enabled personalised coverage

Risk levels

Risk levels

Policy period
Static pricing level
Exposure inefficiency for insurer
Insured risk profile
Coverage and pricing inefficiences for insured

Policy period
Coverage and pricing
Insured risk profile
Coverage and exposure efficiences for both insurer and insured

106 Zurich’s innovation efforts recognized with Global Innovator Gold Award; Klinc takes top award in
Products & Services, Zurich, 25 June 2019.
107 In absence of granular data, insurers use proxies such as driver age, type of car or gender to assess
driving behaviour.
108 Products like Pay as You Live (Health Insurance) or Pay as You Drive (Auto Insurance) rely not on the
dynamic pricing, but short-period pricing based on limited behavioral data, which is a finer version of
static pricing.

30 Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Tech-enabled insurance product and service opportunities (cont.)
Modularisation global insurance coverage in retail business
Cyber

Travel

Cyber

Liability

Home

Mobility

Travel
Liability

Home

Mobility

25-year
adult

Family,
two kids

NatCat

Life

NatCat

Life

Health

Health

Over-exposure
(inefficiency for insurer)

Modularisation and global insurance coverage in commercial insurance
Liability

Cyber

Liability

Cyber

Marine

Marine
Fire

Mid/large
corporates

SMEs

NatCat

Fire

NatCat
Engineering
Business interruption
Risk exposure

Engineering
Business interruption

Risk coverage and price
Under-insurance (protection gap)
No insurance coverage

Note: The green (risk exposure) line in the circular charts indicates an insured’s dynamic risk profile revealed by processing of granular
insured data. The segments and blocks in the same chart indicate the extent to which coverage can be modularized across exposures under
different risk areas (eg, cyber, fire etc.)
Source: Swiss Re Institute

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 31

Product development and underwriting

Extending insurance reach with preventive and value-added services
Insurers may need to focus on
preventing accidents and improving
quality of life.

Insurers with strong distribution networks, brand and ability to adapt to meet
customer needs (eg, simplifying tasks, offering outcomes that reduce pain/improve
gain) could develop new relationships based on trust and value add. They will
reinvent themselves from risk protection to value-add and preventive service
providers. This will help counter any decline in premiums caused by reduction in loss
incidences due to various safety features enabled by technology. Prevention could
contain future claims while value add services build loyalty. These services (see
Table 3) will grow more sophisticated as insurers harness network effects within
cross-industry ecosystems, and should also increase customer stickiness through
increasing touchpoints.109

A wide range of services could be
provided as part of the overall
insurance package.

In commercial lines, insurers could partner with providers of technology to monitor
industrial assets to improve efficiency, safety and early warnings. For example, one
insurer offers a free online tool that helps SMEs assess risk of cyberattacks and
become more proactive on security.110 In personal lines, insurers can enable access
to technologies for coping with or mitigating morbidity. For example in Italy, Axa has
prototyped a cancer profiling service that allows patients with advanced and/or
metastatic tumours to access personalised cancer care.111 And South African insurer
Discovery has a service that provides additional pay-outs to insureds stricken with
permanent disabilities to help them adjust to a new way of life.112

Table 3
Examples of value-added and preventive services
Service Type

Auto

Property

Life

Health

Preventive services

̤̤ Safe driving alerts
̤̤ Maintenance rewards
̤̤ Anti-theft and
breakdown alerts
̤̤ Geo fencing (eg, alert if
driven outside of safe
neighbourhood)
̤̤ Assistance to buy car
̤̤ Concierge services
̤̤ Alert when vehicle is
moved, towed or hit
when parked

̤̤ Remote monitoring
and alerts
̤̤ Flood monitoring in
home basements
̤̤ Automatic shutdowns
of gadgets during ﬁres

̤̤ Online diagnostics
̤̤ Help ﬁnding doctors
̤̤ Scheduling
appointments

̤̤ Medical consultations
̤̤ Screening and
counselling
̤̤ Behavioural
assessments

̤̤ Property security
advice
̤̤ Facility maintenance
̤̤ Emergency repair
services

̤̤ Meal and fitness
vouchers
̤̤ Retirement, financial
planning
̤̤ Healthcare services

̤̤ Digital health records
̤̤ Fitness club
memberships and
discounts

Value added services

Source: Compilation of value-added and preventive services by Swiss Re Institute

109 Digital ecosystems: extending the boundaries of value creation in insurance, Swiss Re, 2019.
110 “Cyber Insurance” on armourinsurance.ca
111 Efma and Accenture Reveal Winners of Innovation in Insurance Awards 2019, Accenture, 25 June
2019.
112 The Purple Life Plan, Discovery, 2019.

32

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Digitalisation and underwriting
Digitisation will enable more forwardlooking underwriting.

Digitalisation of external and internal data will improve risk selection and pricing,
while automation will streamline manual submissions, triaging and binding (see
Table 4). Overall, these developments should reduce underwriting costs, loss ratios
and free up time for underwriters to engage in softer aspects of business (ie,
negotiation and relationship building). Also, developing repositories of digitised risk
information will enable more efficient underwriting than decisions based on limited
claims experience data. For example, Helvetia Insurance enables logistics
companies to purchase transport insurance for their customers through a
straightforward online app in less than two minutes.113

Table 4
Impact of digitisation on underwriting value chain
Value chain

Past

Present

Future

Key enablers

Submissions

Lengthy proposal forms
and human interactions.
No data collection for
post submission analysis

Proposal auto-filling
through third party data.
Chatbot interaction but
limited data collection

Triaging

Delays due to inefficient
workflows and timeconsuming decisions on
referrals

Better quote to market
speed on some LOBs due
to auto-referrals to
appropriate authority

Risk assessment

Manual, time consuming
and limited at the point of
underwriting

Usage of third-party data
for external risk features,
and automated report
interpretation

Fraud detection,
behaviour analysis for
spotting dishonest
disclosures. Complete
data collection
Submission ranking
based on conversion
probability and auto
suggestions on capacity
management
Evolution into a risk
foresight activity with
frequent touch-points
and real-time sensor data

Coverage and pricing

Coverage governed
strictly by insurability,
while pricing based on
static risk matrix

Binding

Delayed binding due to
data entry of paperbased information in
multiple systems

Flexible cover and
pricing for some LOBs,
driven by data on asset
usage and individual
movements
Reduction in binding
time and errors due to
higher flow of digitised
submission data in to
binding process

̤̤ Advanced text and
speech analysis (AI/
ML)
̤̤ Efficient information
storage systems
̤̤ Intelligent business
workflows (AI / NLP)
̤̤ Better readability of
digitized information
(OCR)
̤̤ Digitisation of asset and
biological data
̤̤ Text and image analysis
̤̤ Processing of sensor
data
̤̤ Real-time risk modelling
̤̤ Capacity sharing (P2P,
Digital risk consortiums)
̤̤ Connected sensors

Real-time coverage and
pricing adjustments,
Seamless cover
portability across
insurers
Instant binding on the
basis of end to end
digitised submission and
risk assessment data

̤̤ Same as submission
and triaging

Source: Swiss Re Institute

Submissions triage and routing to become more automated efficient
Submission level accuracy will be
much improved with availability of
more granular customer data.

Increasing digitalisation of geographical, personal and asset information will be
leveraged by insurers to auto-fill proposals, offer risk scores, and even identify more
honest brokers.114 Already pin-code and license plate numbers reveal location
specific hazards and vehicle details, while business registration numbers linked with
municipal data are used to provide occupancy and previous loss history for
commercial clients. For example, about 85% of submissions for Chubb’s business
113 Helvetia transforms logistics and freight companies into insurance professionals, Helvetia,
7 October 2019.
114 Berkshire Hathway Guard Insurance now obtains needed information based on data available online
and offline, which has reduced time from submission to quote. See “Berkshire Hathaway GUARD
Insurance Companies partners with Planck to create full digital underwriting for their commercial lines”,
prnewswire.com, 7 March 2019.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 33

Product development and underwriting

owners policy for SMEs can now flow straight through without any human
intervention on Chubb’s part.115 In the future, intelligent and automated workflows
for triage and routing will be more effective than current business rules.

Risk assessment and underwriting to be more cost effective, engaging
Availability of digitised risk information (eg, biomarkers, activity data, building
footprints, occupancy, vessel/vehicle data) will create risk profiles without physical
risk inspection or medical underwriting requirements (see Figure 20). These data
sets will be especially useful for geographically-scattered assets and individuals.
More complex proposals may still require traditional risk assessment, but intelligent
workflows can automatically assign tasks to suitable risk engineers/doctors, and
natural language processing can enable underwriters to interpret results faster.

Digitisation will reduce the cost of
insurance and turn risk assessment
into an early warning tool.

Figure 20
Different levels of underwriting maturity
Data

UW evidence

AI module

Risk data

§
Learning

Learning

Increasing data

Modelling insights

UW models

Inputs for underwriting

Effort required from customer

Decision/outcome

Dynamic underwriting
– Social media data
– IoT data, fitness, home
– Activity/lifestyle
data/mobility
– Electronic health record

Self optimizing AI driven
underwriting algorithms
using parametrised indexes
accessed through platforms
– Minimal customer input

Automatically
assign risk class

Accelerated underwriting
– Prescription history
– Credit data
– Driving records/
telematics
– Claim experience

The insurer may request
either third parties or the
customer for additional data
if needed

Traditional underwriting
– Proposal
– Tele interview

Underwriting decision solely
based on customer inputs

‘No’ –
assign risk class

‘Yes’ –
additional underwriting

Inspection report,
lab test, physician statement

Machine learning expertise

Emerging
sources of data

Data sources
currently available

Data-Input from
customer

Data

Emerging complexity

Source: Swiss Re Institute

115 Andrew G. Simpson, “InsurTechs Take Note: Chubb’s Digital Marketplace Serves 1,000 Agents a Day”,
insurancejournal.com, 13 February 2019.

34

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Dynamic underwriting can provide
mutual benefits to insureds and
insurers alike.

Standard and accelerated underwriting approaches differ in speed, but both are
static. They evaluate the risk at the time of underwriting but do not track future
behaviour, either positive or negative. This results in price inefficiencies for both
policyholders and insurers. In life and health, greater availability and quality of
Electronic Health Records (EHR), and fitness and social media data can allow
dynamic underwriting and provide predictive insights on state of health. With this
information, insurers can evaluate the change in risk factors (ie, smoker status, BMI,
blood glucose, blood pressure, cholesterol) over time, and predict claims probability.

External data helps digital risk
assessment for SME risks, even for
niche products.

SMEs and mid-corporates have diverse business activities and many exposures,
which are sometimes too small to justify complete risk assessment by an insurer. For
this reason, insurers leverage third-party data sets to auto-fill proposal forms and
offer risk scores. For example, online reviews related to small businesses can be used
as a proxy for their operational risk levels. Some insurers use social media to improve
customer experience by tracking changes in SME payrolls, office premises and
revenue to indicate growth or retrenchment, so that brokers can refine target
strategies.116 Others leverage digital footprints to deliver niche products like trade
credit insurance to SMEs by tracking live financial data. In cyber, new tools can
ingest and analyse data to generate cyber risk scores for SMEs in less than two
minutes.117

Digital underwriting for large
corporate risks is less advanced.

Large corporate risks require bespoke solutions and critical underwriting information
for such risks is not yet sufficiently digitised. As such, the underwriting approach is
more case based. Digitalisation of geo-spatial information has assisted largecorporate underwriting to some extent. For example, InsurTechs provide property
risk engineering solutions to insurers, especially to assess natural hazards.118 In
another case, cargo sensor data can be used to provide enhanced marine
coverage.119 Remote risk inspection can be enabled by allowing risk engineers to
transmit live feeds to underwriters.120 The full value of digitalisation in dynamic
pricing will only be realised when live data from industrial control systems and
facility monitoring systems is integrated with underwriting systems.

116
117
118
119
120

“A move from static data to live data in insurance”, digitalfineprint.com, 31 July 2019.
Cyence for Small Business, guidewire.com.
Insurtech Impact 25, Oxbow Partners, 2018.
Smart Cargo+Cyber Insurance, Covus Insurance, see info.corvusinsurance.com/.
“Virtual i Lets You See” on virtualitechnologies.com

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 35

Product development and underwriting

Pricing and coverage determination to accelerate, be more risk based
Price and coverage are being
automated based on better
assessment of risk data.

Automation of submissions and risk assessments may trigger faster determination of
coverage and better pricing. Automated price and coverage determination are more
common for personal (L&H) and retail (P&C) business. Several examples are
beginning to emerge. In China, Ping An claims that of the nearly 20 million
applications for insurance received in 2018, 96% were auto-underwritten by AI.121
Continued testing, focused on scalable and replicable use cases will inform insurer
strategies in the next few years. Mid-market and commercial insurance segments
still require significant manual effort due to underwriting complexity and price
sensitivity.

This is valuable when there is wide
variability in costs for similar
procedures.

In corporate health insurance, automated pricing and coverage determination is
improving. This sector struggles with high costs and wide variability in treatment
costs for similar procedures. Using Big Data and a modern tech stack,
UnitedHealthcare and Bind, on-demand health insurance start-ups, are designing
better health coverage plans for big employers. To lower costs and better match
risks to employees, they identify about 45 top-up optional procedures that have the
widest range of cost, treatment and effectiveness. Members can opt for these
options only if they need it. Customers pay a base monthly premium that can be as
much as 40% less than the other options that their employer offers.122

Fraud detection and managing moral hazard will become more critical
Underwriting fraud is a risk in the
digital world with decisions needed in
near real time.

In a digital world, underwriting decisions on large volumes of insurance applications
need to be made in near real-time. If insurers are not careful to filter out fraudulent
applications, they can build up a wrong customer portfolio. Some are successfully
using new sources of data to prevent high risk profiles from entering their portfolios.
For example, online insurer InShared, an Achmea initiative, has fully automated its
risk assessment, and determines risk at the point of purchase using multiple
indicators such as the person’s conduct, payment risk and claim risk.123

Insurers will look for innovative
technology to help identify high risk
cases.

As digital insurance becomes more widespread, insurers will look for new
approaches to help identify high-risk cases. About one out of five people admit to
lying on insurance claims applications.124 To counter this, insurers are experimenting
with new digital tools to reduce fraud at the underwriting stage (eg, by utilising facial
biometric tools that leverage machine learning and computer vision technology). In
another example, using third-party data insurers may be able to determine – without
medical evidence – whether a customer is a smoker or not, in order to avoid
expensive medical tests in some cases.

Adverse selection could increase if
insureds withhold new
information from their insurers.

With the spread of digital data, insurers are also more susceptible to rising risks of
anti-selection (adverse selection) as consumers build more understanding of their
own health with different healthy-living apps, genetic tests cheaply available direct
to consumers (DTC), and testing devices available on the market. These advances
bring equal promise and risks, including over-diagnosis and subsequent unwarranted
treatments. The major challenge for insurers is to obtain adequate and risk-relevant
information during the underwriting process, since existing regulation was mostly
enacted before the widespread adoption of DTC genetic tests.125

121 Announcement Of Audited Results For The Year Ended December 31, 2018, Ping An, 2018.
122 Susan Morse, “Insurtech entrepreneurs to lead panel at Health 2.0”, healthcarefinancenews.com,
12 September 2019.
123 How insurers are in control of risks at underwriting, celent.com, 2016.
124 Lying on an insurance application, www.finder.com, October 2018.
125 SONAR: New emeging risk insights, Swiss Re Institute, May 2019

36 Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Underwriting implications, for insureds and insurers
Constant feedback-based processes
will provide better insights for new
products.

Product development and underwriting will increasingly interact and be dependent
on customer facing functions. For example, marketing models will integrate data
obtained from the initial underwriting experience, customer feedback and other
external data to make targeted and pre-approved offers of cover at the right time,
based on specific customer needs and behaviours. Offers will focus on increasing
existing cover to suit needs but also cross-selling into new products that match new
risks, however small, and thereby increase engagement. This can have a direct
impact on new product development, with implications for insureds and insurers.
̤̤ Insureds: Other than for large corporate risks where placement negotiations
involve underwriters visiting and explaining technical aspects to clients,
underwriting has never been truly customer-facing. We expect modularisation of
products and dynamic pricing adjustment will bring higher understanding of
underwriting and risk assessment to retail customers. For example, life or SME
risk scoring apps will make the opaque and cumbersome underwriting process
more consumer-friendly and transparent. Underwriting bundled with proactive
risk management through value added or preventive services will change the
insurer-customer relationship from risk transfer to risk partnership.
̤̤ Insurers: Insurers can benefit from dynamic and more accurate risk pricing, but
they will need to upgrade their systems to process terrabytes of data coming
every day from sensors. Many insurers are still ironing out legacy system
challenges.126 Also, insurers will need to become more responsive to digital
feedback on product development, tests and experiments. The digital world offers
immediate and sometimes ruthless feedback. For instance, one on-demand digital
insurer saw a massive drop in conversions and discovered it was caused by a
small change in the process flow requested by a small segment of customers.127

126 K. Harris-Ferrante, 2019 CIO Agenda: Insurance Industry Insights” Gartner, 15 October 2018.
127 A Khusid, “How we built a customer feedback loop that works”, medium.com, 15 January 2018.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 37

Claims management
Insurers are using advanced analytics and machine learning to create early warning systems and gather practical
insights that prevent accidents, and simplify and speed-up claims processing. Examples include using AI to detect and
verify accident hot spots, estimate repair costs, and identify potential fraud. Historically claims processing has been a
form filling-in exercise. Digitalisation will help improve customer experience and efficiency of back office processes.
A modular approach is key for
end-to-end claim digitalisation.

Digitalisation can improve the claims experience both in terms of trust, lower friction
in customer experience, and complexity in back office operations. In a survey, only
57% of adults online in the US expressed confidence that their insurer would treat
them fairly in the event of a claim.128 A modular approach will enable end-to-end
digitalisation and ongoing claims management processes (see Table 5). For example
in 2018, USAA launched a 21-member innovation team to digitise components of
claims operations and reduce the full claims cycle to days, and even hours in some
cases.129

Table 5
Claims innovation timeline
Claims journey

Past

Present

Future

Key enablers

FNOL
(First Notice of Loss)

Complex forms which
require explanation
Manually by insurer staff

Data gathering/
fraud detection

Rudimentary fraud
analytics

Claims estimation

Manual claims
adjudication

Automatically: IoT,
satellite, weather
stations, etc.
Digitally augmented
support in complex
situations; AI advice
Automated using
analytics like, big data
and AI
Automated claim
adjudication

Satellite imagery,
weather stations, IoT, etc.

Claims admin

Customer uses the
phone, post, online/
mobile apps
Data entry by insurer
staff

Settlement

Reimbursement via bank
cheques /drafts

Instant payout,
automated validation,
options (eg, replacement,
second hand)

Linked payment systems,
intelligent algorithms

Combination of manual
and models to identify
fraud
Mix of manual inspection
or advanced
technologies
Direct to vendor (garage,
hospital) and
reimbursement

Connected systems,
intelligent algorithms
Computing power,
access to varied data
sources
Computing power, better
algorithms

Source: Swiss Re Institute

128 Forrester Analytics Consumer Technographics® North American Financial Services Survey, Forrester,
Q4 2017 (US).
129 Inside USAA’s claims innovation team, DIG IN, 15 August 2018.

38

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

End-to-end digitalisation of claims management
Digital loss prevention
Loss prevention is an important but
undervalued aspect of the insurance
value chain.

Loss prevention is an important but, arguably, undervalued aspect of the insurance
value chain, partly due to lack of research and understanding, and because of its
capital-intensive nature. Investing in loss prevention technologies requires significant
investment with possibly little to no short-term impact on claims reduction.

Fast-growing internet and smart
phone penetration have made loss
prevention action more feasible.

Across lines of business, it is becoming more feasible financially and technologywise to alert policyholders to the potential threat of damage to life and/or property.
For instance, on receiving notification from meteorological departments or sensors
about a catastrophe, insurers can send push safety warning notifications to
customers’ smartphones. This will help insureds take preventive measures to
mitigate damage. Figure 21 illustrates where an insurer can use external and internal
systems to alert insureds to potential threats.

Figure 21
Illustration of a potential digital prevention process for a natural catastrophe event
System integration

Data sources

Build platform

APIs

Sensors

Finding the
nearest safe zone
and routes in case
of evacuation

Notifications
and alerts sent
to policy holders

GIS systems

Policy holders

Lower claims

Consumer takes
steps to prevent
loss of life and
property

Insurers systems
to capture, process
and prioritise
information

Meteorological/
Government agencies

Real-time application

Real-time
situation
monitoring

Cloud-based
network
External systems

Insurer systems

Source: Swiss Re Institute

Digital first-loss notification
New insights are enabling automatedrisk management processes via Digital
FNOL.

There has been significant innovation in First Notification of Loss (FNOL) processes
given IoT sensors, high-speed internet and a wide range of automated data-capture
technologies such as drones and satellite imagery. This data can be shared with a
range of audiences. For instance, CSAA Insurance partnered with Owlcam on a
Video First Notice of Loss (vFNOL) to send videos to a driver’s mobile phone when a
car crashes or is broken into. The driver can share it with the police.130

130 CSAA Insurance Group and Owlcam Partner to Accelerate InsuranceClaims Process for Customers by
Utilizing Video Technology, CSAA Insurance Group, 5 June 2019.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 39

Claims management

Insurers can initiate contact with
policyholders even before a claim is
reported.

Insurers now pro actively initiate contact with customers and offer help even before
a claim is reported. PZU, the largest insurer in Central and Eastern Europe, has
launched a Before-You-Call Service where operational coordinators actively scan
digital and analog information for news of loss events from the web, emails, calls
from witnesses, TV and radio. If they identify customers who could potentially have
been impacted by the loss event, they verify the scope of those customers’
insurance, and offer assistance services covered by their policies. A customer can
register a claim during this first contact or at a later convenient date.131

Claims administration
AI applications can accelerate the
customer through the next stage of
the claims process.

In this phase of the claims journey, a case is analysed based on the information
received in the FNOL (eg, checking coverage details, screening for fraudulent
claims). With AI assistance, digital assessments can automatically verify coverage
details like sum assured, deductibles, co-payments and past claims. The reduction in
manual touchpoints can speed up the process significantly, and also lower the costs
associated with manual inspections. For example, Farmers Insurance adjudicates
claims using only photos and video-estimating technology in 95% of total-loss auto
claims. It aims to expand this capability to property as well.132

Fraud detection
Advanced analytics can improve fraud
detection…

Insurance fraud costs billions of dollars each year. Traditional fraud-detection
statistical models have drawbacks, not least that sampling methods to analyse data
can lead to undetected fraud. Also, these methods rely on experience: when a new
type of fraud occurs, insurers are vulnerable. With Big Data and AI, new tools can
combine thousands of variables from the moment a claim is filed, and identify
incoherence between data relating to the claim and the wider context. Many
insurers use social media analytics to detect fraudulent individual claims. For
example, Allstate is leveraging online information to identify fraud faster (like
claimants who say they are too injured to work, yet engage in strenuous activity such
as horseback riding).133 Analytics can help uncover large frauds by flagging certain
suspicious events like when smaller medical clinics originate large volumes of claims.
While individual insurers may lack sufficient data to detect mass fraud, law
enforcement agencies co-ordinate among carriers with analytics know-how to
uncover patterns (eg, search for comparable bills coming from the same parties).134

Digital loss assessment, claims estimation and settlement
…and also help automate loss
assessment.

Digitalisation can increase transparency in dealing with customers, with provision of
a comprehensive overview of the calculation which could also prevent litigation and
recalculation costs. Moreover, automation of claims assessment can help reduce
administration costs, making insurance more affordable. During the California
wildfires of 2018, USAA used images from drones to settle many home insurance
claims on the same day. Previously, it could take weeks or even months for a team to
be safely mobilised to inspect and adjudicate the loss to a property damaged by
fire.135 Other interesting experiments are emerging. For example, Allianz ran a pilot
with Amazon to enable claims handlers to make an offer on the day a customer
makes a claim by assessing the content loss based on live Amazon prices.136

131 How PZU has successfully built a culture of innovation, EFMA, 5 February 2019.
132 “How Insurers Are Digitizing Claims with Apps, Photos, Videos, E-Payments and More”,
insurancejournal.com, 11 June 2019.
133 “Allstate Finds Fraud Faster with Innovative Data Company”, prnewswire.com, 28 November 2017.
134 sigma 4/2019 - Advanced analytics: unlocking new frontiers in P&C insurance, Swiss Re Institute,
August 2019.
135 Inside USAA’s claims innovation team, DIG IN, 15 August 2019.
136 Allianz Replacement Solution – Allianz France, EFMA, 2019.

40 Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

There has been wider adoption of
touchless loss assessment and claims
settlement in personal and small
business insurance…

Figure 22 is a graphical representation of touchless claims settlements at work in
parametric insurance policies. Claims for personal lines and small-business
insurance can be largely automated, enabling carriers to achieve straight-through
processing rates and reduce claims processing times from days to hours or minutes.
In motor insurance, use of AI-assisted assessment can significantly reduce the time
and cost of loss assessment.137 Ping An has employed AI to settle motor claims
across the spectrum of activities, including first notice, sharing digital pictures, loss
assessment and document handling. Surveys can be completed within 5–10
minutes for 95.5% of daytime accidents and, using facial recognition, payments can
be made in seconds.138

Figure 22
Touchless claims settlement
in parametric insurance

Smart
distribution

Flight
delay

Earthquake

Tropical
cyclone

Agriculture

Smart
policy

Smart claims
trigger

Smart
payout

$

Travel
platform

Buy

$

(Digital) agent/
broker

Buy

$

Direct (digital)
mobile

Buy

$

Agriculture
ecosystem

Buy

$

$

$

$

Source: Swiss Re Institute

…and some early experimentation in
life lines.

Insurers are experimenting with new claims technology in life insurance too. MetLife
piloted an Ethereum blockchain pilot known as Lifechain to help families determine if
a deceased is protected by a policy. Once an obituary is placed in the press, the
family is automatically informed of this MetLife programme and, if they participate,
Lifechain encrypts the deceased’s national ID number and searches for a matching
policy. If a match is found, an automatic notification initiates the claims process.139

137 In case of an accident, the policyholder just needs to take few photos and streaming videos of the
vehicle and damaged area and upload it on insurer’s app together with the description of the damage
and the accident.
138 “China’s Ping An P&C Unveils Credit-Based Smart Auto Insurance Claim Solution”, insurancejournal.
com, 30 January 2019.
139 “How does it make faster life insurance with blockchain?”, medium.com, 13 August 2019.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 41

Claims management

Claims implications, for insureds and insurers
Processes will become flexible and
open to innovation

In the future, greater use will be made of characteristics of claims submissions to
better inform product pricing and underwriting decisions. Insurers can generate data
that leads to better risk assessments for policy underwriting. Using real time claims
data, insurers will also be able to better monitor which partners and customer
segments offer most growth potential, and adapt marketing and distribution
initiatives in real time. To iterate quickly, processes will need to be flexible and open
to innovation.
̤̤ Insureds: The quality of the claims experience has a strong impact on loyalty and
renewal behaviour. In a property claims satisfaction study by JD Power, 90% of
“highly satisfied” claimants said they would definitely renew their policies. On the
other hand, 60% of claimants who were “indifferent” or “displeased” said they
would shop for a new carrier within the year.140 Insurers have built customer
experience and digital channels development units to introduce design skills and
thinking methodologies into key areas. They have redesigned services and
processes by putting themselves in customers’ shoes.141
̤̤ Insurers: Loss prevention will become a bigger theme in claims management.
Insurers will combine claims and behavioural data to action loss prevention
measures. As different components of the value chain digitally share information
and feedback, this could compress the value chain as digital distribution platforms
connect directly with capital providers without depending on traditional
capabilities of primary insurers. For example, providers of parametric insurance
may dispense with large claims departments and assessors, except in cases of
suspected fraud. In another example, a global insurer used an InsurTech program
platform to transfer part of a >USD 100 million layer of parametric risk to multiple
risk markets.142

140 Satisfaction with Property Insurance Claims Surges, Even as Number of Catastrophes Reaches
10-Year High, J.D. Power Finds, J.D. Power, 1 March 2017.
141 We innovate for our customers, Generali. op. cit.
142 “Tremor places world’s first programmatic parametric swap transaction”, Artemis, 20 May 2019.

42

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Outlook
Digitalisation will enable development of new data-driven business models that impact the entire insurance value
chain. Access to data and the capability to model risks will be core to success. True leverage will be through
collaboration with other assets such as key supplier partners, entry points to ecosystems and the know how to
generate customer insights.

Refining existing and developing new competencies
The insurance value chain can benefit
from new data and analytics.

In recent years, as premium growth has slowed, insurers have been looking to a
variety of approaches to differentiate products and services within the rapidly
expanding new economy sectors (see Figure 23).

Figure 23
New capabilities to be established
Business transformation
Mindset

Partner network
Superior partner
network (access to
risk and access to
capabilities)

Culture

Data & insights
Unique data-sets
and/or insights access

Customer insights
Deep customer
(behavioural) insights

Analytics
Data analytics &
machine intelligence,
collaborative,
autonomous robotics

Underwriting
expertise
Scalable risk modelling
and pricing expertise

Capabilities
Source: Swiss Re Institute

Insurers will need to build capabilities in the following areas:
̤̤ Building a superior partner network: Identifying innovative and appropriate
ecosystem partners and suppliers, including in the technology space, to offer
unique value propositions to customers. Competition for suitable partners is high,
and relationships need to be fostered, the focus being on creating mutual value.
̤̤ Accessing unique and large data sets: Besides existing and accessible data,
owning unique data sets for superior risk modelling is becoming an important
differentiating factor. The key is to assemble data layers in a way that creates
unique insights that cannot be easily copied by competitors.
̤̤ Developing deeper customer insights: Putting the customer at the centre of the
ecosystem and aligning all actions to customer needs. Using behavioural insights
to personalise offerings is essential. This holds true even if an insurer does not
own a customer relationship directly.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 43

Outlook

̤̤ Analytical expertise: The more insurers understand data and related context, the
more sophisticated risk modelling can become. AI stands to reshape the risk
landscape, resulting in better simulations.
̤̤ Scalable underwriting expertise: Insurers can build superior risk models based
on existing and unique data sets, combined with analytical methods and tools that
can be scaled across ecosystems and value chains. This will enable insurers to
make appropriate adjustments to value chains and respond more dynamically.

Impact on the existing insurance value chain
The focus of customer insights within
the value chain is changing.

There will be a close interplay between product design, claims management and
distribution touchpoints to generate customer insights. The changing location of the
yellow box across the three panels in Figure 24 shows how the sources of customer
insights are changing. In the past, the product factory (the insurer) was disconnected
from the direct customer. There was instead close collaboration between the insurer
and the physical sales channel, the intermediary. Intermediaries were in direct
contact with the customer and, with their customer insights, could go back to the
insurer to ask for products to be designed in a particular way.

Figure 24
Decreasing distance between supplier and customer via digital channels
Yesterday

Today

Interaction
channel

Customer

Customer journey

Corporation
customer

Personal
direct

offline
online

Retail
customer

Personal
3rd party

Tomorrow

Customer journey

Corporation
customer

Direct
online offline

offline
online

Customer journey

Retail
customer

Corporation
customer

Phone
Personal
chat direct 3rd party

Retail
customer

offline
online

Digital
platform

Digitally
Digitally
augmented
augmented
empathic human
digital
interface
interface

Producer
(supplier)

Smart
augmented Platform
Product factory
(insurance)

Product factory
(insurance)

Digital
augmentation

Critical insights
Source: Swiss Re Institute

The product factory accesses insights
from multiple channels.

44

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Today, the landscape has shifted towards a multi- and omni-channel approach, and
the product factory is getting closer to the end customer. This is because insurers
have greater influence over product design. Products must be customised to be sold
via different channels: simpler products are sold direct, while products with greater

complexity are largely sold through personal channels (eg, life insurance combined
with investment management). The greater the complexity of products, the lower
the willingness on the part of consumers to buy online. At the same time, the more
insurers move to direct channels, the simpler their products need to become.
Product portfolios will therefore begin to display a wide mix, as insurers create
products that can be modularised and sliced and diced for different channels.
In the future, product factories will be able to directly access all the ingredients of
product design and will be much closer to the risk. These insights will be customised
based on digital touchpoints, and inputs about exposure will be generated in real
time. We think this will result in new business models being created purely around
data access.

In the future, product factories will
directly access all the ingredients for
policy design...

New business models around data
...including access to secure data.

These business models will require secure access to data that can be combined in
different ways, including insights from connected objects, platform providers,
behavioural insights from the consumer and environmental data. Categories 1 to 10
in Figure 25 show examples of data that will be available to an insurer. Some of these
are newer data (eg, behavioural data based on customer context), while others are
classical traditional data (eg, from claims and preventive services).

Figure 25
Illustration of a potential digital proposition and digital business models along the customer journey
Customer journey
1)

Behavioural &
contextual data insights

2)

Smart assistant
services insights

3)

Touch-points and
distribution insights

4)

Channel/market
places insights

5)

Aggregated
data insights

6)

Environmental
data insights

7)

Contextual
provider insights

8)

Sensor data insights
(customer lifestyle cluster)

offline
online

BM1

BM2

Health

9)
10)

Insurance value chain
insights (ie, claims)
Preventive service/value
adding service insights

Education/
working

Product
management

UWR
pricing

Living

Free time

Marketing &
Claims
sales
management

Mobility

Customer
service

Note: BM stands for Business Model
Source: Swiss Re Institute

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 45

Outlook

Data from multiple providers via open
Application Programming Interfaces
(API) may be combined to enable
different business models.

In the future, insurers will operate in an environment where they will need continuous
access to different data sources. This is a strategic issue, taking insurers beyond their
existing value chain. No single firm or market place currently provides all these
sources of data. While many data vendors focus on extraction and distribution of
data, few concentrate on data refinement.143 We expect that this will give rise to
specialised aggregators focused on integration and refinement. The more integrated
and refined the data, the wider the service offering to a customer. This has many
implications for the insurance industry, in particular the need for modular products,
personalisation and better distribution.

Insurers may need to invest in
separate new data businesses.

Insurers will need to decide if they are mere suppliers of coverage, or whether they
are willing to collaborate or own other business models to gain control over the key
areas that impact their business. Different stakeholders will seek control over data
driven businesses. For example, if all telematics data were put onto one platform
anonymously, who would be most likely to own that market place? Will brokers stake
a claim? Players that cannot influence such data aggregators will find the going
difficult. If data brokers become omnipresent, the insurers dependent on them could,
over time, be relegated to the status of suppliers.

143 How data will shape the new urban future, Swiss Re Institute, 15 January 2019.

46

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020

Conclusion
Consumers are more demanding than
ever before. Using digital technology,
insurers can respond.

The insurance landscape is changing as consumers seek more engaging and
personalised purchase experiences, relevant to their lifestyle. Empowered with
digitally-facilitated information and greater choice, consumers have become more
informed and self-directed than ever before. On the supply side, tools like AI enable
more effective customer interaction, allowing insurers to better understand
consumer preferences to develop customised and flexible product offering, with
dynamic pricing and servicing through (personal) virtual assistance, 24/7. New
sources of data also offer opportunities for more granular client segmentation

Boundaries are increasingly blurred
across sectors.

The impact of digitalisation extends beyond the insurance value chain itself to the
whole business ecosystem in which insurers operate. Industry boundaries are
becoming blurred as firms in several sectors build digital platforms that can connect
to different market places, supply chain hubs and financial networks. Non-insurer
participants in business ecosystems like manufacturers and telecom companies too
are gaining access to customer data, and digital analytics capabilities can enhance
their client product offering.

Lasting change will require more than
incremental thinking.

Utilised more fully and intelligently, new data and technology can reinforce and
secure the relevance of the insurance industry to future customers. The same is true
of leveraging cross industry ecosystems. This sigma depicts the end version of what
a digital insurer will look like. While high barriers to entry offer protection against
competitive threat to some extent, incumbents must continue to embrace both
incremental and sometimes more radical innovation to optimise the potential of
consumers touchpoints from both the insured and the insurer perspective.

Innovation will help transform the
effectiveness and raison d’ étre of the
insurance industry.

Full-scale disruption of existing insurers seems unlikely, at least in the near term.
Incumbents have time to adjust to the changing risk environment, shifts in customer
attitudes and accelerating advances in technology, but there is no room for
complacency. Successful insurers will be those that can leverage insights from their
investments, partnerships and collaborations to upgrade their business practices.
Forward thinking and innovative insurers could build on the new infrastructure being
created today to offer compelling risk protection solutions aligned with evolving
regulation and, in doing so, genuinely transform industry effectiveness.

Swiss Re sigma No 1/2020 47

Recent sigma publications
2020

No 1

2019

Data-driven insurance: ready for the next frontier?

No 1
No 2
			
No 3
		
No 4
No 5
No 6

Emerging markets: the silver lining amid a challenging outlook
Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters in 2018: “secondary“ perils
on the frontline
World insurance: the great pivot east continues
Advanced analytics: unlocking new frontiers in P&C insurance
Indexing resilience: a primer for insurance markets and economies
Global economic and insurance outlook 2020/21

2018
No 1
			
No 2
No 3
No 4
No 5
No 6

Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters in 2017:
a year of record-breaking losses
Constructing the future: recent developments in engineering insurance
World insurance in 2017: solid, but mature life markets weigh on growth
Profitability in non-life insurance: mind the gap
Global economic and insurance outlook 2020
Mortality improvement: understanding the past and framing the future

2017

No 1
No 2
			
No 3
No 4
No 5
No 6
2016

No 1
No 2
No 3
No 4
No 5

2015

No 1
No 2
			
No 3
No 4
No 5
No 6

Cyber: getting to grips with a complex risk
Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters in 2016:
a year of widespread damages
World insurance in 2016: the China growth engine steams ahead
Insurance: adding value to development in emerging markets
Commercial insurance: expanding the scope of insurability
Life in-force management: improving consumer value and long-term profitability
Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters in 2015:
Asia suffers substantial losses
Insuring the frontier markets
World insurance 2015: steady growth amid regional disparities
Mutual insurance in the 21st century: back to the future?
Strategic reinsurance and insurance: the increasing trend of customised solutions
Keeping healthy in emerging markets: insurance can help
Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters in 2014:
convective and winter storms generate most losses
M & A in insurance: start of a new wave?
World insurance in 2014: back to life
Underinsurance of property risks: closing the gap
Life insurance in the digital age: fundamental transformation ahead

2014

No 1	Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters in 2013:
large losses from floods and hail; Haiyan hits the Philippines
No 2 Digital distribution in insurance: a quiet revolution
No 3 World insurance in 2013: steering towards recovery
No 4 Liability claims trends: emerging risks and rebounding economic drivers
No 5 How will we care? Finding sustainable long-term care solutions for an ageing world

2013

No 1	Partnering for food security in emerging markets
No 2 Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters in 2012:
A year of extreme weather events in the US
No 3 World insurance 2012: Progressing on the long and winding road to recovery
No 4 Navigating recent developments in marine and airline insurance
No 5 Urbanisation in emerging markets: boon and bane for insurers
No 6 Life insurance: focusing on the consumer

Published by
Swiss Re Management Ltd.
Swiss Re Institute
Mythenquai 50/60
P.O. Box
8022 Zurich
Switzerland
Telephone
Email

+41 43 285 2551
institute@swissre.com

Authors
Dr. Evangelos Avramakis
Jonathan Anchen
Ashish Dave
Aakash Kiran Raverkar
Binay Biswal
Rajeev Sharan
Sophia Steinmetz
sigma editor
Paul Ronke

© 2020 Swiss Re. All rights reserved.
The editorial deadline for this study was 10 November 2019.

Managing editors
Dan Ryan

sigma is available on Swiss Re’s website:
www.swissre.com/sigma

Dr Jerome Jean Haegeli
Swiss Re Group Chief Economist

The internet version may contain slightly updated information.
Graphic design and production:
Corporate Real Estate & Logistics / Media Production, Zurich

Printing: Multicolor Print AG, Baar

The entire content of this sigma edition is subject to copyright with all
rights reserved. The information in this edition may be used for private or
internal purposes, provided that any copyright or other proprietary
notices are not removed. Electronic reuse of the information published in
sigma is prohibited.
Reproduction in whole or in part or use for any public purpose is
permitted only with the prior written approval of Swiss Re Institute and if
the source reference “sigma 1/2020 Data-driven insurance: ready for the
next frontier?“ is indicated. Courtesy copies are appreciated.
Although all the information used in this sigma edition was taken from
reliable sources, Swiss Re does not accept any responsibility for the
accuracy or comprehensiveness of the information given or forward
looking statements made. The information provided and forward-looking
statements made are for informational purposes only and in no way
constitute or should be taken to reflect Swiss Re’s position, in particular in
relation to any ongoing or future dispute. In no event shall Swiss Re be
liable for any loss or damage arising in connection with the use of this
information and readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on
forward-looking statements. Swiss Re undertakes no obligation to
publicly revise or update any forward-looking statements, whether as a
result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Order no: 270_0120_EN

Swiss Re Management Ltd.
Swiss Re Institute
Mythenquai 50 /60
P.O. Box
8022 Zurich
Switzerland
Telephone + 41 43 285 2551
swissre.com/institute

